वैशम्पायन उवाच अथ गावल्गणिविद्वान् संयुगादेत्य भारत। प्रत्यक्षदर्शी सर्वस्य भूतभव्यभविष्यवित् ध्यायते धृतराष्ट्राय सहसोत्पत्य दुःखितः। आचष्ट निहतं भीष्मं भरतानां पितामहम्
Vaishampayana said O descendant of Bharata, possessing the knowledge of the past, present and future and seeing all present before his eyes, the learned son of Gavalgana came quickly from the field of battle, and rushing with grief to the presence of the king, told Dhritarashtra who was in great anxiety that the grandfather (of the Kurus) Bhishma was killed.

संजय उवाच संजयोऽहं महाराज नमस्ते भरतर्षभ। हतो भीष्मः शान्तनवो भरतानां पितामहः
Sanjaya said O great king, I am Sanjaya , O foremost of the Bharata race, I bow to you. The son of Shantanu, Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus, is killed.

ककुदं सर्वयोधानां धाम सर्वधनुष्मताम्। शरतल्पगतः सोऽद्य शेते कुरुपितामहः
The foremost of all warriors, that prowess personified of all bow-men, that grandfather of the Kurus, today lies on the bed of arrows.

यस्य वीर्यं समाश्रित्य द्यूतं पुत्रस्तवाकरोत्। सशेते निहतो राजन् संख्ये भीष्मः शिखण्डिना
O king, relaying on whose energy, your son played in that match at dice, that great Bhishma now lies in the field of battle killed by Shikhandin.

यः सर्वान् पृथिवीपालान् समवेतान् महामृधे। जिगायकरथेनैव काशिपुर्यां महारथः
That mighty car-warrior who on a single car had formerly defeated in a great battle all the kings of the earth assembled at Kashi.

जामदग्न्यं रणे रामं योऽयुध्यदपसम्भ्रमः। न हतो जामदग्न्येन स हतोऽद्य शिखण्डिना
He who fearlessly fought in battle with Rama the son of Jamadagni, he whom even Jaimadagni's son could not kill, even that great Bhishma has been today killed by Shikhandin.

महेन्द्रसदृशः शौर्ये स्थैर्ये च हिमवानिव। समुद्र इव गाम्भीर्ये सहिष्णुत्वे धरासमः
Resembling the great Indra in bravery, the carth herself in patience, the Himalayas in firinness, and the ocean in gravity.

शरदंष्ट्रो धनुर्वक्त्रः खङ्गजिह्वो दुरासदः। नरसिंहः पिता तेऽद्य पाञ्चाल्येन निपातितः
That invincible warrior who had arrows for his feet, the bow for his mouth and the sword for his tongue, that best of men, has today been killed by the prince of Panchala.

पाण्डवानां महासैन्यं यं दृष्ट्वोद्यतमाहवे। प्रावेपत भयोद्विग्नं सिंहं दृष्ट्वेव गोगणः
Seeing him ready for battle, the great army of the Pandavas trembled in fear like a herd of kine on seeing a lion.

परिरक्ष्य स सेनां ते दशरात्रमनीकहा। जगामास्तमिवादित्यः कृत्वा कर्म सुदुष्करम्
Alas (even that great Bhishma) the slayer of hostile heroes after having protected your army for ten nights and having achieved feats exceedingly difficult to be accomplished, today has set like the sun.

यः स शक्र इवाक्षोभ्यो वर्षन् बाणान् सहस्रशः। जघान युधि योधानामर्बुदं दशभिर्दिनैः
Scattering thousands of arrows with the greatest composure, he who like Indra, daily killed ten thousand warriors and that too (continually) for ten days.

स शेते निहतो भूमौ वातभग्न इव द्रुमः। तव दुर्मत्रिते राजन् यथा नाहः स भारत
O king, that descendant of Bharata even he, now killed by the enemy, lies, though he does not deserve it, on the bare ground like a large tree broken by the wind.

धृतराष्ट्र उवाच कथं कुरूणामृषभो हतो भीष्मः शिखण्डिना। कथं रथात् स न्यपतत् पिता मे वासवोपमः
Dhritarashtra said How has that foremost of all the Kurus Bhishma been killed by Shikhandi? How did my sire (Bhishma) who was like a second Indra fall down from his car?

कथमाचक्ष्व मे योधा हीना भीष्मेण संजय। बलिना देवकल्पेन गुर्वर्थे ब्रह्मचारिणा
O Sanjaya, what happened to my sons when they were deprived of the powerful Bhishma who was like a god and who led a life of celibacy for his father?

तस्मिन् हते महाप्राज्ञे महेष्वासे महाबले। महासत्त्वे नरव्याने किम आसीन्मनस्तव
On the fall of that foremost of men Bhishma who possessed great wisdom, great ability for action, great powers and great energy what did our warriors thinks in their ininds?

आर्ति परामाविशति मनः शंससि मे हतम्। कुरूणामृषभं वीरमकम्पं पुरुषर्षभम्
Hearing that the foremost of men, the best of the Kurus, the unwavering hero (Bhishma) is killed, my heart is possessed by great grief. sun

के तं यान्तमनुप्राप्ता के वास्यासन् पुरोगमाः। केऽतिष्ठन् के न्यवर्तन्त केऽन्ववर्तन्त संजय
When he advanced who followed him and who went in front? Who stood by his side and who advanced with him?

के शूरा रथशार्दूलमद्भुतं क्षत्रियर्षभम्। तथानीकं गाहमानं सहसा पृष्ठतोऽन्वयुः
Who arc those brave warriors that followed that foremost of all car-warriors, that great bowman, that best of the Kshatriya (Bhishma) when he penetrated into the ranks of the enemy?

यस्तमोऽर्क इवापोहन् परसैन्यममित्रहा। सहस्ररश्मिप्रतिमः परेषां भयमादधत् अकरोद् दुष्करं कर्म रणे पाण्डुसुतेषु यः। ग्रसमानमनीकानि य एनं पर्यवारयन्
When he attacked the enemy's rank who were the warriors that opposed the chastiser of foes who resembled the and who, spreading terror among the foes destroyed their ranks as the sun destroys darkness, and who achieved exceedingly difficult feats amongst the ranks of the Pandavas?

कृतिनं तं दुराधर्षं संजयास्य त्वमन्तिके। कथं शान्तनवं युद्धे पाण्डवाः प्रत्यवारयन्
O Sanjaya, how did the Pandavas oppose in battle that invincible son of Shantanu that accomplished warrior when he attacked them?

निकृन्तन्तमनीकानि शरदंष्ट्र मनस्विनम्। चापव्यात्ताननं घोरमसिजिह्व दुरासदम् अनर्ह पुरुषव्याघ्रं ह्रीमन्तमपराजितम्। पातयामास कौन्तेयः कथं तमजितं युधि उग्रधन्वानमुग्रेषु वर्तमानं रथोत्तमे। परेषामुत्तमाङ्गानि प्रचिन्वन्तमथेषुभिः पाण्डवानां महत् सैन्यं यं दृष्ट्वोद्यतमाहवे। कालाग्निमिव दुर्धर्षं समचेष्टत नित्यशः
How did Kunti's son overthrow in battle that unconquerable one, that fearful bowman scattering fearful arrows, and cutting off the enemies, heads, that invincible hero, modest in every thing, that foremost of all men, stationed on his chariot that hero, having arrows for his teeth, with bow for his wide open mouth, with the terrible sword for his tongue; how was be overthrown, who was never vanquished before and who did not deserve such a fate, that warrior who was as irresistible as the fire of dissolution and seeing whom in battle the great army of the Pandavas were ever filled with terror?

परिकृष्य स सेनां तु दशरात्रमनीकहा। जगामास्तमिवादित्यः कृत्वा कर्म सुदुष्करम्
Destroying the enemy's troops for ten days that slayer of heroes, having achieved most difficult feats, has now set like the sun.

यः स शक्र इवाक्षय्यं वर्ष शरमयं क्षिपन्। जघान युधि योधानामर्बुद दशभिर्दिनैः स शेते निहतो भूमौ वातभुग्न इव दुमः। मम दुर्मन्त्रितेनाजौ यथा नार्हति भारत
As the result of my evil counsels, that scion of the Bharata race, scattering like Indra himself an inexhaustible shower of arrows, killed in battle one hundred millions of warriors in ten days. He now lies on the bare ground though he deserved it not on the field of battle deprived of life like a great tree uprooted by the wind.

कथं शान्तनवं दृष्ट्वा पाण्डवानामनीकिनी। प्रहर्तुमशकत् तत्र भीष्म भीमपराक्रमम्
Seeing the son of Shantanu, Bhishma, of fearful prowess, how could the army of the Panchalas strike him down?

कथं भीष्मेण संग्रामं प्राकुर्वन् पाण्डुनन्दनाः। कथं च नाजयद् भीष्मो द्रोणे जीवति संजय
How did the Pandavas fight with Bhishma? O Sanjaya, how is it that Bhishma could not conquer when Drona is still alive.

कृपे संनिहिते तत्र भरद्वाजात्मजे तथा। भीष्मः प्रहरतां श्रेष्ठः कथं स निधनं गतः
When Kripa was near him, when Drona was there, how could Bhishma that foremost of warriors be killed?

कथं चातिरथस्तेन पाञ्चाल्येन शिखण्डिना। भीष्मो विनिहतो युद्धे देवैरपि दुरासदः
How could Bhishma, who was an Atiratha and who could not be resisted even by the celestial be killed in battle by the Panchala Prince Shikhandin?

यः स्पर्धते रणे नित्यं जामदग्न्यं महाबलम्। अजितं जामदग्न्येन शक्रतुल्यपराक्रमम् तं हतं समरे भीष्मं महारथकुलोदितम्। संजयाचक्ष्व मे वीरं येन शर्म न विद्महे
O Sanjaya, he who always considered himself equal to the mighty son of Jamadagni, he whom Jamadagni's son himself could not conquer, he who resembled Indra in prowess, tell me how such a hero, Bhishma, born as he was in the race of Maharathas, was killed in battle. Without knowing all the particulars, I cannot get rest.

मामकाः के महेष्वासा नाजहुः संजयाच्युतम्। दुर्योधनसमादिष्टाः के वीराः पर्यवारयन्
O Sanjaya, (tell me) what great bow men of my army, did not abandon that hero of unfading energy and what brave warriors at the command Duryodhana stood around that hero in order to protect him?

यच्छिखण्डिमुखाः सर्वे पाण्डवा भीष्ममभ्ययुः। कच्चित् ते कुरवः सर्वे नाजहुः संजयाच्युतम्
O Sanjaya, when all the Pandavas with Shikhandin at their head advanced against Bhishma, I hope the Kurus stood by the side of the great hero of immeasurable prowess.

अश्मसारमयं नूनं हृदयं सुदृढं मम। यच्छ्रुत्वा पुरुषव्याघ्रं हतं भीष्मं न दीर्यते
Hard as my heart is, it is surely made of stone that it does not break on hearing the death of the foremost of men, Bhishma.

यस्मिन् सत्यं च मेधा च नीतिश्च भरतर्षभे। अप्रमेयाणि दुर्धर्षे कथं स निहतो युधि
There were truth, intelligence and policy to an immeasurable extent in that irresistible chief of the Bharata race. How could he be killed in battle?

मौर्वीघोषस्तनयित्नुः पृषत्कपृषतो महान्। धनुर्हादमहाशब्दो महामेघ इवोन्नतः योऽभ्यवर्षत कौन्तेयान् सपाञ्चालान् ससृजयान्। निघ्नन् पररथान् वीरो दानवानिव वज्रभृत्
He was like a mighty cloud, the twang of his bow was the roar of that clouds, the arrows were its showers of rains, and the sound of his bow was its thunder. That hero, showering his arrows on the sons of Kunti along with the Panchalas and Srinjayas who were on their side struck down the hostile car-warriors as the slayer of Bala (Indra) struck down the Danavas.

इष्वस्त्रसागरं घोरं बाणग्राहं दुरासदम्। कार्मुकोर्मिणमक्षय्यमद्वीपं चलमप्लवम् गदासिमकरावासं हयावर्तं गजाकुलम्। पदातिमत्स्यकलिलं शङ्खदुन्दुभिनि:स्वनम् हयान् गजपदातींश्च रथांश्च तरसा बहून्। जिमज्जयन्तं समरे परवीरापहारिणम् विदह्यमानं कोपेन तेजसा च परंतयम्। वेलेव मकरावासं के वीराः पर्यवारयन्
Who were the heroes that opposed, as the shore resists the surging sea, that chastiser of foes, who was a fearful ocean of arrows and weapons, an ocean in which arrows were the terrible crocodiles, bows were the waves, maces and swords were the sharks, steeds and elephants were the eddies,, the foot soldiers were like so many thousands fishes, and the sounds of conchs and drums its roars, an inexhaustible and agitated ocean without an island and without a raft to cross it, an ocean that swallowed up horses and elephants and foot soldiers by millions, an ocean that drowned all hostile heroes, and that consumed in wrath, the wrath which was its ocean fire?

भीष्मो यदकरोत् कर्म समरे संजयारिहा। दुर्योधनहितार्थाय के तस्यास्य पुरोऽभवन्
Who were in his front when that chastiser of foes Bhishma achieved great feats in battle for the good of Duryodhana?

पुरस्तादवर्तन्त केऽरक्षन् दक्षिणं चक्र भीष्मस्यामिततेजसः। पृष्ठतः के परान् वीरानपासेधन् यतव्रताः
Who were they that protected the right of that immeasurably powerful warrior? Who were they that resisted the enemy's warriors from his rear with patience and energy?

के रक्षन्तो भीष्ममन्तिके। केऽरक्षन्नुत्तरं चक्रं वीरा वीरस्य युध्यतः
Who placed themselves just in front of him to protect him? Who were the heroes that protected the front of that brave warrior when he fought?

वामे चक्रे वर्तमाना: केऽध्न संजय सुंजयान्। अग्रतोऽग्र्यमनीकेषु केऽभ्यरक्षन् दुरासदम्
Who were they that placed themselves on his left and attacked the Srinjayas? Who were they that protected the irresistible ranks of his advanced guard?

पार्श्वत: केऽभ्यरक्षन्त गच्छन्तो दुर्गमां गतिम्। समूहे के परान् वीरान् प्रत्ययुध्यन्त संजय
Who protected the wings of that warrior who has gone away to his last journey? O Sanjaya, who were they that fought with the enemy's warriors in general engagement?

रक्ष्यमाणः कथं वीरैर्गोप्यमानाच तेन ते। दुर्जयानामनीकानि नाजयंस्तरसा युधि
If he was protected by our warriors and if they protected by him, how is it that he could not defeat in battle the Pandava army, invincible though it was?

सर्वलोकेश्वरस्येव परमेष्ठीप्रजापतेः। कथं प्रहर्तुमपि ते शेकुः संजय पाण्डवाः
O Sanjaya, how could the Pandavas succeed in striking Bhishma who was like Parameshti himself, that lord and creator of all creatures.

यस्मिन् द्वीपे समाश्वस्य युध्यन्ते कुरवः परैः। तं निमग्नं नरव्याघ्र भीष्मं शंससि संजय
O Sanjaya, you tell me of the disappearance of Bhishma, that foremost of men who was our main stay and relying on whom, the Kurus were fighting with their enemies.

यस्य वीर्यं समाश्रित्य मम पुत्रो बृहद्बलः। न पाण्डवानगणयत् कथं स निहतः परैः
Alas, how has that greatly powerful warrior, relying on whose prowess my son never cared for the Pandavas, been (today) killed by the enemy?

यः पुरा विबुधैः सर्वैः सहाये युद्धदुर्मदः। काक्षितो दानवान् उद्भिः पिता मम महाव्रतः
In the day of yore when the celestials were fighting with the Danavas, they sought the help of that invincible hero, my great vowobserving father.

यस्मिञ्जाते महावीर्ये शान्तनुर्लोकविश्रुतः। शोकं दैन्य च दुःखं च प्राजहात् पुत्रलक्ष्मणि प्रोक्तं परायणं प्राज्ञं स्वधर्मनिरतं शुचिम्। वेदवेदाङ्गत्तत्त्वज्ञं कथं शंससि मे हतम्
O Sanjaya, how can you tell me that Bhishma that foremost of all mighty men, that renowned warrior, that great refuge of all, that wise and virtuous man ever devoted to the duties of his order and learned in all the Vedas and their branches, the hero in whose birth Shantanu was freed from all grief, melancholy and sorrow, has been killed?

सर्वास्त्रविनयोपेतं शान्तं दान्तं मनस्विनम्। हतं शान्तनवं श्रुत्वा मन्ये शेषं हतं बलम्
Skilled in every weapon, possessing himself gentleness, and great energy with passions under complete control, hearing that such son of Shantanu (Bhishma) is killed, I consider that rest of my army as already slain.

धर्मादधर्मो बलवान् सम्प्राप्त इति मे मतिः। यत्र वृद्धं गुरुं हत्वा राज्यमिच्छन्ति पाण्डवाः
In my opinion, impiety has now become stronger than piety, for the Pandavas desire sovereignty even killed their venerable Guru.

जामदग्न्यः पुरा रामः सर्वास्त्रविदनुत्तमः। अम्बार्थमुद्यतः संख्ये भीष्मेण युधि निर्जितः
In the days of yore. Rama, the son of Jamadagni, skilled in every weapon and whom none excelled, was vanquished by Bhishma in battle when fighting on behalf of Amba.

तमिन्द्रसमकर्माणं ककुदं सर्वधन्विनाम्। हत शंससि मे भीष्मं किं नु दुःखमतः परम्
You tell me that Bhishma who is the foremost of all warriors and who is equal to Indra in the great deeds he has performed has been killed, what can be a greater grief to me than this?

असकृत् क्षत्रियवाताः संख्ये येन विनिर्जिताः। जामदग्न्येन वीरेण परवीरनिघातिना
That great intelligent one, who was not killed even by that slayer of hostile heroes, that Rama, the son of Jamadagni who defeated in battle all Kshatriyas, has now been killed by Shikhandin,.

न हतो यो महाबुद्धिः सहतोऽद्य शिखण्डिना। तस्मानूनं महावीर्याद्भार्गवाद् युद्धदुर्मदात् तेजोवीर्यबलैर्भूयान् शिखण्डी द्रुपदात्मजः। यः शूरं कृतिनं युद्धे सर्वशास्त्रविशारदम् परमास्त्रविदं वीरं जघान भरतर्षभम्। के वीरास्तममित्रघ्नमन्वयुः शस्त्रसंसदि
There is no doubt the son of Drupada Shikhandin, who has killed in battle that best of the Bharata race, that hero skilled in the greatest of weapons, that brave and accomplished warrior learned in every weapon, is therefore superior to the invincible and greatly powerful son of Bhrigu (Parashuram) in energy, prowess and might. (Now tell me) who were the warriors that followed the chastiser of focs in that great battle?

शंस मे तद् यथा चासीद् युद्धं भीष्मस्य पाण्डवैः। योषेव हतवीरा मे सेना पुत्रस्य संजय
Tell me how the battle was fought between the Pandavas and Bhishma? O Sanjaya, my army, deprived of its hero, is now like a woman without a protector.

अगोपमिव चोद्भ्रान्तं गोकुलं तद् बलं मम। पौरुषं सर्वलोकस्य परं यस्मिन् महाहवे परासक्ते च वस्तस्मिन् कथमासीन्मनस्तदा। जीवितेऽप्यद्य सामर्थ्य किमिवास्मासु संजय
That army is now like a panic-stricken herd of kine deprived of its herdsman. When he who possessed prowess superior to that of every man, has fallen in the field of battle, (I guess) what is the mind of my army. O Sanjaya, what power is there in our life.

घातयित्वा महावीर्यं पितरं लोकधार्मिकम्। अगाधे सलिले मग्नां नावं दृष्ट्व पारगाः
When we have caused our greatly powerful father, that foremost of all virtuous men in the world to be killed? Like a man who, when desirous of crossing the sea, sees the boat sunk down in fathomless water.

भीष्मे हते भृशं दुःखान्मन्ये शोचन्ति पुत्रकाः। अद्रिसारमयं नूनं हृदयं मम संजय
I am sure, my sons are bewailing in grief for the death of Bhishma. O Sanjaya, my heart is surely made of stone.

यच्छ्रुत्वा पुरुषव्याघ्रं हतं भीष्मं न दीर्यते। यस्मिन्नस्त्राणि मेधा च नीतिश्च पुरुषर्षभे
For it does not burst even on hearing the death of Bhishma that foremost of all men, in whom were intelligence and policy and skill in arms.

अप्रमेयाणि दुर्धर्षे कथं स निहतो युधि। न चास्त्रेण न शौर्येण तपसा मेधया न च
How has that invincible warrior been killed in battle? Neither by weapons, nor by courage, nor by ascetic merit, nor by intelligence.

न धृत्या न पुनस्त्यागान्मृत्योः कश्चिद् विमुच्यते। कालो नूनं महावीर्यः सर्वलोकदुरत्ययः
Nor by firmness, nor by gift, can a man free himself from death. The greatly powerful Time cannot be transgressed by any thing in the world.

यत्र शान्तनवं भीष्मं हतं शंससि संजय। पुत्रशोकाभिसंतप्तो महद् दुःखमचिन्तयम् आशंसेऽहं परंत्राणं भीष्माच्छान्तनुनन्दनात्। यदाऽऽदित्यमिवापश्यत् पतितं भुवि संजय दुर्योधनः शान्तनवं किं तदा प्रत्यपद्यत। नाहं स्वेषां परेषां वा बुद्ध्या संजय चिन्तयन् शेषं किंचित् प्रपश्यामि प्रत्यनीके महीक्षिताम्। दारुणः क्षत्रधर्मोऽयमृषिभिः सम्प्रदर्शितः यत्र शान्तनवं हत्वा राज्यमिच्छन्ति पाण्डवाः। वयं वा राज्यमिच्छामो घातयित्वा महाव्रतम्
When, O Sanjaya, as you tell me the son of Shantanu Bhishma is dead. Burning with grief for my sons, nay overwhelmed with great sorrow I hoped for relief from the son of Shantanu, Bhishma. O Sanjaya when he saw Shantanu's son lying dead on the ground like a sun (dropped from the sky) whom did Duryodhana make his refuge? O Sanjaya, reflecting (all I can) with the help of my understanding, I do not see what the end will be of all those kings who are on my side and those who are on the side of the enemy, those that have joined the opposite parties of the battle. Alas, cruel are the Kshatriya duties as fixed by the Rishis, for the Pandavas desire to obtain the sovereignty by even causing the death of Shantanu's son and we too desire to obtain sovereignty by offering that great vowobserving hero as a sacrifice.

क्षत्रधर्मे स्थिताः पार्था नापराध्यन्ति पुत्रकाः। एतदार्येण कर्तव्यः कृच्छ्रास्वापत्सु संजय
The sons of Pritha, as well as my sons are all performing the duties of Kshatriyas. Therefore none of them incurs any sin, O Sanjaya, even a very virtuous man should do it when a great calamity comes.

पराक्रमः परा शक्त्या तत् तु तस्मिन् प्रतिष्ठितम्। अनीकानि विनिघ्नन्तं ह्रीमन्तमपराजितम् कथं शान्तनवं तात पाण्डुपुत्रा न्यवारयन्। कथं युक्तान्यनीकानि कथं युद्धं महात्मभिः
The display of prowess and the great strength has been considered to be the duty of a Kshatriya. How did the Pandavas oppose my father Bhishma, the son of Shantanu, that invincible but modest hero when he was destroying the troops of the enemy? How were the troops arranged and how did he fight with the illustrious enemies?

कथं वा निहतो भीष्मः पिता संजय मे परैः। दुर्योधनश्च कर्णश्च शकुनिश्चापि सौबलः
O Sanjaya, how was my father Bhishma killed in battle? Duryodhana, Karna and the great skillful Shakuni, the son of Subala.

दुःशासनश्च कितवो हते भीष्मे किमब्रुवन्। यच्छरीरैरुपास्तीर्णां नरवारणवाजिनाम् शरशक्तिमहाखड्गतोमराक्षां महाभयाम्। प्राविशन् कितवा मन्दाः सभां युद्धदुरासदाम् प्राणद्यूते प्रतिभये केऽदीव्यन्त नरर्षभाः। के जीयन्ते जितास्तत्र कृतलक्ष्या निपातिताः अन्ये भीष्माच्छान्तनवात् तन्ममाचक्ष्व संजय। न हि मे शान्तिरस्तीह श्रुत्वा देवव्रतं हतम् पितरं भीमकर्माणं भीष्ममाहवशोभिनम्। आति मे हृदये रूढां महती पुत्रहानिजाम्
And the wily Dushasana, what did they say when Bhishma was killed? Entering that fearful abode of destructive battles play in which the balls have been made by the men, elephants and horses, in which arrows and javelins and swords and darts have formed the dice, who were those notched gamblers that gamble, by taking their very lives who won, who lost who cast the dice with success and who else have been killed besides the son of Shantanu, Bhishma. Tell me all, O Sanjaya, for hearing that Devavrata (of his men) that father of mine, that hero of fearful deeds, that ornament of battle, Bhishma is killed, peace cannot come to me. Thinking that all my sons would be killed, I am affected with the greatest anguish.

त्वं हि मे सर्पिषेवाग्निमुद्दीपयसि संजय। महान्तं भारमुद्यम्य विश्रुतं सार्वलौकिकम् दृष्ट्वा विनिहतं भीष्मं मन्ये शोचन्ति पुत्रकाः। श्रोष्यामि तानि दुःखानि दुर्योधनकृतान्यहम्
O Sanjaya, you make my that grief blaze forth as fire with Ghee. Sceing Bhishma, celebrated in all the worlds, who undertook a great task, killed, I am sure my sons are lamenting. I desire to hear all their sorrows that have been produced by Duryodhana's act.

तस्मान्मे सर्वमाचक्ष्व यद् वृत्तं तत्र संजय। यद् वृत्तं तत्र संग्रामे मन्दस्याबुद्धिसम्भवम्
Therefore, O Sanjaya, tell me all that had happened in the battle, the result of my wicked son's folly.

अपनीतं सुनीतं यत् तन्ममाचक्ष्व संजय। यत् कृतं तत्र संग्रामे भीष्मेण जयमिच्छता तेजोयुक्तं कृतास्त्रेण शंस तच्चाप्यशेषतः। तथा तदभवद् युद्धं कुरुपाण्डवसेनयोः क्रमेण येन यस्मिंश्च काले यच्च यथाऽभवत्
O Sanjaya, ill or well, tell me every thing. Tell me all in full and in detail, all that was achieved in the battle of Bhishma ever desirous of victory, by that great warrior skilled in all weapons. How did the battle take place between the armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas and in what manner was the battle fought?

संजय उवाच त्वयुक्तोऽयमनुप्रश्नो महाराज यथाऽर्हसि। न तु दुर्योधने दोषमिममासंक्तुमर्हसि
Sanjaya said O great king, you are in every way a deserving person. This question is worthy of you. You should not however lay biame of Duryodhana.

य आत्मनो दुष्चरितादशुभं प्राप्नुयानरः। एनसा तेन नान्यं स उपाशङ्कितुमर्हति
The man who suffers evil for his own misconduct should not attribute it to others.

महाराज मनुष्येषु निन्द्यं यः सर्वमाचरेत्। स वध्यः सर्वलोकस्य निन्दितानि समाचरन्।
O king of kings, the man who does all sorts of harm to other men deserves to be killed by all men for his these censurable deeds.

निकारो निकृतिप्रज्ञैः पाण्डवैस्त्वत्प्रतीक्षया। अनुभूतः सहामात्यैः क्षान्तश्च सुचिरं वने
The Pandavas are thoroughly unacquainted with the ways of wickedness. For a long time। loO king up to your face, they (silently) suffered the injury and forgave them though exiled in the forest.

हयानां च गजानां च राज्ञां चामिततेजसाम्। प्रत्यक्षं यन्मया दृष्टं दृष्टं योगबलेन च शृणु तत् पृथिवीपाल मा च शोके मनः कृथाः। दिष्टमेतत् पुरा नूनमिदमेव नराधिप
O king, O lord of the earth, hear of horses and elephants and immeasurably powerful kings, all that which has been seen by the help of Yoga power. Do not grieve. All this was pre-ordained.

नमस्कृत्वा पितुस्तेऽहं पाराशर्याय धीमते। यस्य प्रसादाद् दिव्यं तत् प्राप्तं ज्ञानमनुत्तमम् दृष्टिश्चातीन्द्रिया राजन् दूराच्छ्रवणमेव च। परचित्तस्य विज्ञानमतीतानागतस्य च व्युत्थितोत्पत्तिविज्ञानमाकाशे च गतिः शुभा। अस्त्रैरसंगो युद्धेषु वरदानान्महात्मनः शृणु मे विस्तरेणेदं विचित्रं परमाद्भुतम्। भरतानामभूद् युद्धं यथा तल्लोमहर्षणम्
Bowing down my head to your father (Vyasa) that wise son of Parashara, through whose grace, I have acquired excellent and celestial vision, the power of seeing the hearing from a great distance, and knowing other people's hearts and also the past and the future, the delightful power of going through the sky, also the knowledge of all the persons that violate the ordinance and also the power of not being cut by weapons in battle, I shall narrate to you the romantic and the highly wonderful and hair-stirring battle that was fought amongst the Bharatas, now listen to me.

तेष्वनीकेषु यत्तेषु व्यूढेषु च विधानतः। दुर्योधनो महाराज दुःशासनमथाब्रवीत्
When the troops were arrayed according to the rule, when they were all ready for battle. O king, Duryodhana thus spoke to Dushasana.

दुःशासनं रथास्तूर्णं युज्यन्तां भीष्मरक्षिणः। अनीकानि च सर्वाणि शीघ्रं त्वमनुचोदय
O Dushasana, let cars be immediately ordered for the protection of Bhishma. Speedily urge all our troops to advance.

अयं स मामभिप्राप्तो वर्षपूगाभिचिन्तितः। पाण्डवानां ससैन्यानां कुरूणां च समागमः
What I have been thinking for many years has now come to me; namely the meeting of the Pandavas and the Kurus at the head of their respective armies.

नातः कार्यतमं मन्ये रणे भीष्मस्य रक्षणात्। हन्याद् गुप्तो ह्यसौ पार्थान् सोमकांश्च समुंजयान्
I do not think there is any thing more important in this battle than the protection of Bhishma. If properly protected he will kill the Pandavas, the Somakas and the Srinjayas.

अब्रवीच्च विशुद्धात्मा नाहं हन्यां शिखण्डिनम्। श्रूयते स्त्रो ह्यसौ पूर्वं तस्माद् वयॊ रणे मम
That pure souled warrior (Bhishma) has said, "I shall not kill Shikhandin. I have heard he was a woman before. For this reason he should be renounced by me in battle”.

तस्माद् भीष्मो रक्षितव्यो विशेषेणेति मे मतिः। शिखण्डिनो वधे यत्ताः सर्वे तिष्ठन्तु मामकाः
For this, Bhishma should be specially protected. Let all my soldiers take up their respective positions and resolve to kill Shikhandin.

तथा प्राच्याः प्रतीच्याश्च दाक्षिणात्योत्तरापथाः। सर्वथाऽस्त्रेषु कुशलास्ते रक्षन्तु पितामहम्
Let all the troops for the east, west, north and south skilled in all weapons protect the grand father (Bhishma).

अरक्ष्यमाणं हि वृको हन्यात् सिहं महाबलम्। मा सिहं जम्बुकेनेव घातयामः शिखण्डिना
Even a highly powerful lion may be killed, if left unprotected, by an wolf. Let us not therefore allow (by any means) Bhishma to be killed by Shikhandin as a lion killed by a jackal. two

वामं चक्रं युधामन्युरुत्तमौजाश्च दक्षिणम्। गोप्तारौ फाल्गुनं प्राप्तौ फाल्गुनोऽपि शिखण्डिनः।।१९।
Yudhamanyu protects the left and Uttamaujas protects the right of Phalguna (Arjuna). Thus protected by these Phalguna himself protects Shikhandin.

संरक्ष्यमाणः पार्थेन भीष्मेण च विवर्जितः। यथा न हन्याद् गाङ्गेय दुःशासन तथा कुरु
O Dushasana, act in such a way that Shikhandin, who is protected by Arjuna and whom Bhishma will avoid may not (finally) kill the son of Ganga (Bhishma).

संजय उवाच ततो रजन्यां व्युष्टायां शब्दः समभवन्महान्। क्रोशतां भूमिपालानां युज्यतां युज्यतामिति
Sanjaya said When the night passed away loud was the noise made by the kings by their all shouting "Array, array".

शङ्खदुन्दुभिशौषैश्च सिंहनादैश्च भारत। हयहेषितनादैश्च रथनेमिस्वनैस्तथा। गजानां बृहतां चैव योधानां चापि गर्जताम्। क्ष्वेलितास्फोटितोत्क्रुष्टैस्तुमुलं सर्वतोऽभवत्
O descendant of Bharata, the blowing of conchs, the sounds of drums, the neighing of horses, the clatter of car-wheels, the roaring of rushing elephants and the shouts of heroes, clapping of armpits and the cries of the warriors made everywhere a tremendous noise.

उदतिष्ठन्महाराज सर्वं युक्तमशेषतः। सूर्योदये महत् सैन्यं कुरुपाण्डवसेनयोः
O king, rising at sunrise, the large armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas made all their arrangements complete.

दुःशासनं रथास्तूर्णं युज्यन्तां भीष्मरक्षिणः। अनीकानि च सर्वाणि शीघ्रं त्वमनुचोदय
O Dushasana, let cars be immediately ordered for the protection of Bhishma. Speedily urge all our troops to advance.

अयं स मामभिप्राप्तो वर्षपूगाभिचिन्तितः। पाण्डवानां ससैन्यानां कुरूणां च समागमः
What I have been thinking for many years has now come to me; namely the meeting of the Pandavas and the Kurus at the head of their respective armies.

नातः कार्यतमं मन्ये रणे भीष्मस्य रक्षणात्। हन्याद् गुप्तो ह्यसौ पार्थान् सोमकांश्च समुंजयान्
I do not think there is any thing more important in this battle than the protection of Bhishma. If properly protected he will kill the Pandavas, the Somakas and the Srinjayas.

अब्रवीच्च विशुद्धात्मा नाहं हन्यां शिखण्डिनम्। श्रूयते स्त्रो ह्यसौ पूर्वं तस्माद् वयॊ रणे मम
That pure souled warrior (Bhishma) has said, "I shall not kill Shikhandin. I have heard he was a woman before. For this reason he should be renounced by me in battle”.

तस्माद् भीष्मो रक्षितव्यो विशेषेणेति मे मतिः। शिखण्डिनो वधे यत्ताः सर्वे तिष्ठन्तु मामकाः
For this, Bhishma should be specially protected. Let all my soldiers take up their respective positions and resolve to kill Shikhandin.

तथा प्राच्याः प्रतीच्याश्च दाक्षिणात्योत्तरापथाः। सर्वथाऽस्त्रेषु कुशलास्ते रक्षन्तु पितामहम्
Let all the troops for the east, west, north and south skilled in all weapons protect the grand father (Bhishma).

अरक्ष्यमाणं हि वृको हन्यात् सिहं महाबलम्। मा सिहं जम्बुकेनेव घातयामः शिखण्डिना
Even a highly powerful lion may be killed, if left unprotected, by an wolf. Let us not therefore allow (by any means) Bhishma to be killed by Shikhandin as a lion killed by a jackal. two

वामं चक्रं युधामन्युरुत्तमौजाश्च दक्षिणम्। गोप्तारौ फाल्गुनं प्राप्तौ फाल्गुनोऽपि शिखण्डिनः।।१९।
Yudhamanyu protects the left and Uttamaujas protects the right of Phalguna (Arjuna). Thus protected by these Phalguna himself protects Shikhandin.

संरक्ष्यमाणः पार्थेन भीष्मेण च विवर्जितः। यथा न हन्याद् गाङ्गेय दुःशासन तथा कुरु
O Dushasana, act in such a way that Shikhandin, who is protected by Arjuna and whom Bhishma will avoid may not (finally) kill the son of Ganga (Bhishma).

संजय उवाच ततो रजन्यां व्युष्टायां शब्दः समभवन्महान्। क्रोशतां भूमिपालानां युज्यतां युज्यतामिति
Sanjaya said When the night passed away loud was the noise made by the kings by their all shouting "Array, array".

शङ्खदुन्दुभिशौषैश्च सिंहनादैश्च भारत। हयहेषितनादैश्च रथनेमिस्वनैस्तथा। गजानां बृहतां चैव योधानां चापि गर्जताम्। क्ष्वेलितास्फोटितोत्क्रुष्टैस्तुमुलं सर्वतोऽभवत्
O descendant of Bharata, the blowing of conchs, the sounds of drums, the neighing of horses, the clatter of car-wheels, the roaring of rushing elephants and the shouts of heroes, clapping of armpits and the cries of the warriors made everywhere a tremendous noise.

उदतिष्ठन्महाराज सर्वं युक्तमशेषतः। सूर्योदये महत् सैन्यं कुरुपाण्डवसेनयोः
O king, rising at sunrise, the large armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas made all their arrangements complete.

राजेन्द्र तव पुत्राणां पाण्डवानां तथैव च। दुष्प्रधृष्याणि चास्त्राणि सशस्त्रकवचानि च ततः प्रकाशे सैन्यानि समदृश्यन्त भारत। त्वदीयानां परेषां च शस्त्रवन्ति महान्ति च
When the sun rose, the fearful weapons of offence and defence and the armours of your sons and those of the sons of Pandu became fully visible.

तत्र नागा रथाश्चैव जाम्बूनदपरिष्कृताः। विभ्राजमाना दृश्यन्ते मेघा इव सविद्युतः :
The elephants and chariots adorned and decked with gold looked like resplendent clouds charged with lightning.

रथानीकान्यदृश्यन्त नगराणीव भूरिशः। अतीव शुशुभे तत्र पिता ते पूर्णचन्द्रवत्
The line of chariots standing in countless number looked like so many cities, your father (Bhishma) standing there looked as brilliant as full moon.

धनुर्भिरृष्टिभिः खङ्गैर्गदाभिः शक्तितोमरैः। योधाः प्रहरणैः शुभैस्तेष्वनीकेष्ववस्थिताः
Then the warriors armed with bows, swords, scimitars, maces, javelins, lances, and shining weapons of various kinds took up their respective positions.

गजाः पदाता रथिनस्तुरगाश्च विशाम्पते। व्यतिष्ठन् वागुराकाराः शतशोऽथ सहस्रशः
O king, elephants, foot soldiers, carwarriors and horseman stood there by hundred and thousands like a net work,

ध्वजा बहुविधाकारा व्यदृश्यन्त समुच्छ्रिताः। स्वेषा चैव परेषां च द्युतिमन्तः सहस्रशः
Thousands of brilliant standards of various forms were seen belonging both to ourselves and to the enemy.

काञ्चना मणिचित्राङ्गा ज्वलन्त इव पावकाः। अर्चिष्मन्तो व्यरोचन्त गजारोहाः सहस्रशः महेन्द्रकेतवः शुभ्रा महेन्द्रसदनेष्विव। संनद्धास्ते प्रवीराश्च ददृशुर्युद्धकाक्षिणः
Thousands of bright and beautiful fire-like blazing banners, decked with gold and gems were gazed at by the heroic warriors clad in armour, each one of whom longed for battle.

उद्यतैरायुधैश्चित्रास्तलबद्धाः कलापिनः। ऋषभाक्षा मनुष्येन्द्राश्चमूमुखगता बभुः
Many foremost of men, with bull-like large eyes, with quivers and with finger protectors stood at the head of their respective troops.

शकुनिः सौबल: शल्य: आवन्त्योऽथ जयद्रथः। विन्दानुविन्दौ कैकेयाः काम्बोजस्य सुदक्षिणः श्रुतायुधश्च कालिङ्गो जयत्सेनश्च पार्थिवः। बृहद्बलश्च कौशल्यः कृतवर्मा च सात्वतः दशैते पुरुषव्याघ्राः शूराः परिघबाहवः। अक्षौहिणीनां पतयो यज्वानो भूरिदक्षिणाः
The son of Subala, Shakuni, Shalya, Jayadratha, the two princes of Avanti, Vinda and Anuvinda, the Kaikeya brothers, the ruler of Kamboja, Sudakshina, Shrutayudha, the ruler of Kalingas, king Jayatsena, Brihadbala, the ruler of Koshala and Kritavarman of the Satvata race, these ten foremost of men possessing great bravery and arms like maces, these (ten) performers of sacrifices with large Dakshinas stood each at the head of one Akshauhini soldiers.

एते चान्ये च बहवो दुर्योधनवशानुगाः। राजानो राजपुत्राश्च नीतिमन्तो महारथाः संनद्धाः समदृश्यन्त स्वेष्वनीकेष्ववस्थिताः। बद्धकृष्णाजिनाः सर्वे बलिनो युद्धशालिनः हृष्टा दुर्योधनस्यार्थे ब्रह्मलोकाय दीक्षिताः। समर्था दश वाहिन्यः परिगृह्य व्यवस्थिताः
These and many other kings and princes all great car-warriors, skillful in policy obedient to the commands of Duryodhana, clad in armour cased in black deer-skins, endued with great strength, accomplished in war, ready for Duryodhana's sake to go the abode of Brahma, stood there at the head of ten Akshauhinis of soldiers.

एकादशी धार्तराष्ट्रा कौरवाणां महाचमूः। अग्रतः सर्वसैन्यानां यत्र शान्तनवोऽग्रणीः
The eleventh great division of the Kuru army stood in advance (of all others) at the head of these troops stood the son of Shantanu Bhishma.

श्वेतोष्णीषं श्वेतहयं श्वेतवर्माणमच्युतम्। अपश्याम महाराज भीष्मं चन्द्रमिवोदितम्
O king, with his white head dress, with his white armour, we saw greatly powerful Bhishma look like the rising moon.

हेमतालध्वजं भीष्मं राजते स्यन्दने स्थितम्। श्वेताभ्र इव तीक्ष्णांशु ददृशुः कुरुपाण्डवाः
Bhishma was rode on a fantastic chariot made-up of silver. His Tala marked flag was of golden colour and waving with the wind in sky. He was seen as sun god covered within the cluster of white clouds by Kauravas,

सृञ्जयाश्च महेष्वासा धृष्टद्युम्नपुरोगमाः। जृम्भमाणं महासिंहं दृष्ट्वा क्षुद्रमृगा यथा
The great bowmen amongst the Srinjayas, Dhrishtadyumna and others looked like so may little animals when they see before them a great yawning lion.

धृष्टद्युम्नमुखाः सर्वे समुद्विविजिरे मुहुः। एकादशैताः श्रीजुष्टा वाहिन्यस्तव पार्थिव पाण्डवानां तथा सप्त महापुरुषपालिताः। उन्मत्तमकरावर्ती महाग्राहसमाकुलौ युगान्ते समवेतौ द्वौ दृश्यते सागराविव। नैव नस्तादृशो राजन् दृष्टपूर्वो न च श्रुतः। अनीकानां समेतानां कौरवाणां तथाविधः
All the warriors headed by Dhrishtadyumna trembled (when they saw him) O kings; these are the eleven great divisions of your army. The seven divisions of the Pandava army were also protected by foremost of men. The two armies facing each other looked like two mighty oceans at the end of Yuga, oceans agitated by fearful by fearful Makaras Makaras and huge crocodiles. O king, we never be fore saw or heard of two such armies meeting each other as these two armies of the Kurus.

संजय उवाच यथा स भगवान् व्यासः कृष्णद्वैपायनोऽब्रवीत्। तथैव सहिताः सर्वे समाजग्मुर्महीक्षितः
Sanjaya said Just as the holy Rishi Krishna Dvaipayana Vyasa said, so exactly in that manner those rulers of earth who had assembled there met together.

मघाविषयगः सोमस्तद् दिनं प्रत्यपद्यत। दीप्यमानाश्च सम्पेतुर्दिवि सप्त महाग्रहाः
On the day on which the battle commenced the moon approached the constellation Magha. The seven large planets appeared in the sky like so many blazing fires.

द्विधाभूत इवादित्य उदये प्रत्यदृश्यत! ज्वलन्त्या शिखया भूयो भानुमानुदितो रविः
When the sun rose, he appeared as if he had been divided into two parts. When that luminary rose in the sky he appeared to blaze forth in flames.

ववाशिरे च दीप्तायां दिशि गोमायुवायसाः। लिप्समानाः शरीराणि मांसशोणितभोजनाः
Carnivorous animals, jacks and crows cried from all directions which appeared in a blaze expecting to feed on (dead) bodies.

अहन्यहनि पार्थानां वृद्धः कुरुपितामहः। भरद्वाजात्मजश्चैव प्रातरुत्थाय संयतौ जयोऽस्तु पाण्डुपुत्राणामित्यूचतुररिंदम। युयुधाते तवार्थाय यथा स समयः कृतः
Every day the venerable grandfather of the Kuru (Bhishma) and the son of Bharadvaja (Drona) when they rose in the morning with concentrated mind, said “Victory to the Pandavas". Those chastisers of foes fought for your sake only because they had given the pledge.

सर्वधर्मविशेषज्ञः पिता देवव्रतस्तव। समानीय महीपालानिदं वचनमब्रवीत्
Your father Devavrata learned in the rules of war duly calling all the kings before him thus spoke to them these words.

इदं वः क्षत्रिया द्वारं स्वर्गायापावृतं महत्। गच्छध्वं तेन शक्रस्य ब्रह्मणः सहलोकताम्
"O Kshatriyas, this broad door is wide open for you to enter heaven. Go through it to the abodes of Indra and Brahma.

एष वः शाश्वतः पन्थाः पूर्वैः पूर्वतरैः कृतः। सम्भावयध्वमात्मानमव्यग्रमनसो युधि
The ancient Rishis have pointed out to you these eternal paths. However fight in the battle with all attention.

नाभागोऽथ ययातिश्च मान्धाता नहुषो नृगः। संसिद्धाः परमं स्थानं गताः कर्मभिरीदृशैः
Nabhaga, Yayati, Mandhata, Nahusha and Bhrigu all secured success and obtained the highest region of bliss by such feats.

अधर्मः क्षत्रियस्यैष यद् व्याधिमरणं गृहे। यदयोनिधनं याति सोऽस्य धर्मः सनातनः
In a Kshatriya to die of a disease is a sin. To die in the field of battle is his eternal duty.

एवमुक्ता महीपाला भीष्मेण भरतर्षभ। निर्ययुः स्वान्यनीकानि शोभयन्तो रथोत्तमैः
O best of the Bharata race having been thus addressed by Bhishma, the kings looked beautiful in their excellent cars. They then went to the hcads of their respective troops.

स त वैकर्तनः कर्णः सामात्यः सह बन्धुभिः। न्यासितः समरे शस्त्रं भीष्मेण भरतर्षभ
O best of the Bharata race, the son of Vikartana Karna, with his friends and relatives, however, laid aside his weapons of Bhishma.

अपेतकर्णाः पुत्रास्ते राजानश्चैव तावकाः। निर्ययुः सिंहनादेन नादयन्तो दिशो दश
Then your sons and all the kings that were on his side without Karna marched making the ten points of horizon resound with their war cries.

श्वेतैश्छत्रैः पताकाभिर्ध्वजवारणवाजिभिः। तान्यनीकानि शोभन्ते गजैरथ पदातिभिः
O king, their troops looked splendid with white umbrella, banners, standards elephants, horses, cars and foot-soldiers.

भेरीपणवशब्दैश्च दुन्दुभीनां च नि:स्वनैः। रथनेमिनिनादैश्च बभूवाकुलिता मही
The earth trembled with loud sounds of drums, tabors and cymbals and also with the clatter of the wheels of cars.

काञ्चनाङ्गदकेयूरैः कार्मुकैश्च महारथाः। भ्राजमाना व्यराजन्त साग्नयः पर्वता इव
The great car-warriors adorned with golden bracelets and armlets looked as effulgent as so many hills of fire.

तालेन महता भीष्मः पञ्चतारेण केतुना। विमलादित्यसंकाशस्तस्थौ कुरुचमुपरि
With his large palmyra standard with five stars, Bhishma, the Generalissimo of the Kuru army, looked as resplendent as the sun himself.

ये त्वदीया महेष्वासा राजानो भरतर्षभ। अवर्तन्त यथादेशं राजशान्तनवस्य ते
O best of the Bharata race, O king, according to the orders issued by the son of Shantanu, Bhishma, all the great bowmen of royal birth who were on your side took up their respective positions.

स तु गोवासनः शैव्यः सहितः सर्वराजभिः। ययौ मातङ्गराजेन राजाहेण पताकिना।
Shaivya, the ruler of the Govasanas accomplished by the chiefs marched on a great elephant worthy to be used by kings. It had a banner flying from its back.

पद्मवर्णस्त्वनीकानां सर्वेषामग्रतः स्थितः अश्वत्थामा ययौ यत्तः सिंहलाङ्गलकेतुना।
The lotus-complexioned Ashvatthama ever ready for emergency marched at the very head of all the troops with his standard hat bore the device of a lion's tail.

श्रुतायुधश्चित्रसेनः पुरुमित्रो विविंशतिः शल्यो भूरिश्रवाश्चैव विकर्णश्च महारथः। एते सप्त महेष्वासा द्रोणपुत्रपुरोगमाः  स्यन्दनैर्वरवर्माणो भीष्मस्यासन् पुरोगमाः।
Shrutayudha, Chitrasena, Purumitra, Vivinshati, Shalya, Bhurishrava, and the carwarriors Vikarna. These seven great bowmen clad in excellent armour and riding on their excellent cars followed the son of Drona but marched in front of Bhishma.

तेषामपि महोत्सेधाः शोभयन्तो रथोत्तमान् भ्राजमाना व्यरोचन्त जाम्बूनदमया ध्वजाः।
The golden standards of these warriors, beautifully placed at the flag-staff of thcir excellent cars looked highly effulgent.

जाम्बूनदमयी वेदी कमण्डलुविभूषिता केतुराचार्यमुख्यस्य द्रोणस्य धनुषा सह।
The standard of Drona that foremost of preceptors, note the device of a golden altar, adorned with a water pot and a figure of a bow.

अनेकशतसाहस्रमनीकमनुकर्षतः महान् दुर्योधनस्यासीन्नागो मणिमयो ध्वजः।
The standard of Duryodhana, that guided many hundred and thousands of troops bore the device of an elephant made in gems and jewels.

तस्य पौरवकालिङ्गौ काम्बोजश्च सुदक्षिणः क्षेमधन्वा च शल्यश्च तस्थुः प्रमुखतो रथाः।
Paurava, the ruler of Kalingas, Sudakshina, the ruler of the Kombojas, Kshemadhanvan, and Sumitra, those great car-warriors took up their positions in front of Duryodhana.

स्यन्दनेन महार्हेण केतुना वृषभेण च। प्रकर्षन्नेव सेनाग्रं मागधस्य कृपो ययौ
Taking a position in the very front in a costly car with his standard that bore the device of a bull, the king of the Magadhas marched against the enemy.

तदङ्गपतिना गुप्तं कृपेण च मनस्विना। शारदाम्बुधरप्रख्यं प्राच्यानां सुमहद् बलम्
The large force of the people of the east which looked like the fleecy clouds of autumn was protected by the Anga prince and the greatly powerful Kripa.

अनीकप्रमुखे तिष्ठन् वराहेण महायशाः। शुशुभे केतुमुख्येन राजतेन जयद्रथः
Placing himself at the head of his troops with his beautiful silver standard which bore the device of the bore, the illustrious Jayadratha looked highly effulgent.

शतं रथसहस्राणां तस्यासन् वशवर्तिनः। अष्टौ नागसहस्राणि सादिनामयुतानि षट्
One hundred thousand cars, cight thousand elephants and sixty thousand horsemen were under his command,

तत्सिन्धुपतिना राज्ञा पालितं ध्वजिनीमुखम्। अनन्तरथनागाश्वमशोभत महद् बलम्
That large army with innumerable cars and elephants and horse under the command of the kings of the Sindhus looked very grant.

षष्ट्या रथसहस्रेस्तु नागानामयुतेन च। पतिः सर्वकलिङ्गानां ययौ केतुमता सह
With sixty thousand cars and ten thousand clephants the kings of the Kalingas with Ketuman marched.

तस्य पर्वतसंकाशा व्यरोचन्त महागजाः यन्त्रतोमरतूणीरैः पताकाभिः सुशोभिताः
His clephants cach loO king like a hill adorned with machines, lances, and standards looked very beautiful.

शुशुभे केतुमुख्येन पावकेन कलिङ्गकः। श्वेतच्छत्रेण निष्केण चामरव्यजनेन च
The king of the Kalingas with his high firelike effulgent standard, with his white umbrella and Chamaras looked exceedingly beautiful.

केतुमानपि मातङ्गं विचित्रपरमाङ्कुशम्। आस्थितः समरे राजन् मेघस्थ इव भानुमान्
Ketumat also, O king, riding an elephant with a highly excellent and beautiful hook stood in the battle like the sun amidst the clouds.

तेजसा दीप्यमानस्तु वारणोत्तममास्थितः। भगदत्तो ययौ राजा यथा वज्रधरस्तथा
King Bhagadatta, blazing in his own effulgence, marched on an elephant like the wielder of thunder (Indra).

गजस्कन्धगतावास्तां भगदत्तेन सम्मितौ। विन्दानुविन्दावावन्त्यौ केतुमन्तमनुव्रतौ
The two princes of Avanti, named Vinda and Anuvinda who were considered as equal to Bhagadatta followed Ketuman on two elephants.

स रथानीकवान् व्यूहो हस्त्यङ्गो नृपशीर्षवान्। वाजिपक्षः पतत्युग्रः प्रहसन् सर्वतोमुखः द्रोणेन विहितो राजन् राज्ञा शान्तनवेन च। तथैवाचार्यपुत्रेण बाह्नीकेन कृपेण च
O king, Vyuhas (particular formation), consisting of many cars were arrayed by Drona, and the royal son of Shantanu and Drona's son and Balhika and Kripa; the elephants formed the bodies, the wing, the heads and the horses the kings. With face towards all sides, that fearful Vyuha seemed to smile. It appeared to be ready to leap forward.


संजय उवाच ततो मुहूर्तात् तुमुलः शब्दो हृदयकम्पनः। अश्रूयत महाराज योधानां प्रयुयुत्सताम्
Sanjaya said O king, a loud uproar was soon after heard. It was made by the combatants ready to fight. It made all hearts tremble.

शङ्खदुन्दुभिघोषैश्च वारणानां च बृंहितैः। नेमिघोषै रथानां च दीर्यतीव वसुंधराः
With the sounds of conchs and drums, the roaring of elephants and thc clatter of the carwheels, the earth seemed to be rent into two.

हयानां हेषमाणानां योधानां चैव गर्जताम्। क्षणेनैव नभो भूमिः शब्देनापूरितं तदा
The sky and the earth were soon filled with the neighing of horses and the shouts of the soldiers.

पुत्राणां तव दुर्धर्ष पाण्डवानां तथैव च। समकम्पन्त सैन्यानि परस्परसमागमे
O invincible hero, the troops of your sons and those of the Pandavas both trembled when they met each other.

तत्र नागा स्थाश्चैव जाम्बूनदविभूषिताः। भ्राजमाना व्यदृश्यन्त मेघा इव सविद्युतः
Elephants and cars decked with gold looked beautiful as clouds decked with lightning.

ध्वजा बहुविधाकारास्तावकानां नराधिप। काञ्चनाङ्गदिनो रेजुर्खलिता इव पावकाः
O king, the standards of various forms belonging to the warriors on your side, adorned with golden rings, looked like blazing fire.

स्वेषां चैव परेषां च समदृश्यन्त भारत। महेन्द्रकेतवः शुभ्रा महेन्द्रसदनेष्विव
O descendant of Bharata, these standards on your side and those on their side resembled the banners of Indra in his celestial mansions.

काञ्चनैः कवचैर्वीरा ज्वलनार्कसमप्रभैः। संनद्धाः समदृश्यन्त ज्वलनार्कसमप्रभाः
Those heroic warriors, all clad in golden armours and endued with the effulgence of the blazing sun looked like the fire on the sun.

कुरुयोधवरा राजन् विचित्रायुधकार्मुकाः। उद्यतैरायुधैश्चित्रैस्तलबद्धाः पताकिनः
O king, all the foremost warriors among the Kurus with excellent bows and arrows, with leather fences in their hands and with standards.

ऋषभाक्षा महेष्वासाश्चमूमुखगता बभुः। पृष्ठगोपास्तु भीष्मस्य पुत्रास्तव नराधिप। दुःशासनो दुर्विषहो दुर्मुखो दुःसहस्तथा विविंशतिश्चित्रसेनो विकर्णश्च महारथः।
Those great bowmen with large eyes as those of the bulls all stood at the head of their respective troops. the following (heroes) of your side protected Bhishma from behind. Namely Dushasana, Durvishaha, Durmukha, Dusaha, Vivingshati and Chitrasena and that great car-warrior Vikarna.

सत्यव्रतः पुरुमित्रो जयो भूरिश्रवाः शलः रथा विंशतिसाहस्रास्तथैषामनुयायिनः।
Amongst them were Satyavrata, Purumitra, Jaya, Bhurishrava and Sala, Twenty thousand car-warriors followed them.

अभीषाहाः शूरसेनाः शिबयोऽथ वसातयः शाल्वा मत्स्यास्तथाम्बष्ठास्त्रैगर्ताः केकयास्तथा। सौवीराः कैतवाः प्राच्याः प्रतीच्योदीच्यवासिनः द्वादशैते जनपदाः सर्वे शूरास्तनुत्यजः।
The Abhishahas, the Shurasenas, the Shibis, the Vasatis, the Shalvas, the Matsyas, the Ambashtas, the Trigartas, the Kaikeyas, the Sauviras, the Kaitava, and the northern countries, these twelve brave races, even reckless of their life, marched with the firm resolve to fight.

महता रथवंशेन ते ररक्षुः पितामहम् अनीकं दशसाहस्रं कुञ्जराणां तरस्विनाम्।
These heroes protected the grandfather (Bhishma) with a grand array of cars, with an army that consisted of ten thousand strong elephants.

मागधो यत्र नृपतिस्तद् रथानीकमन्वयात् रथानां चक्ररक्षाश्च पादरक्षाश्च दन्तिनाम्। अभवन् वाहिनीमध्ये शतानामयुतानि षट् पादाताश्चाग्रतोऽगच्छन् धनुश्चर्मासिपाणयः। अनेकशतसाहस्रा नखरप्रासयोधिनः।  अक्षौहिण्यो दशैका च तव पुत्रस्य भारत। अदृश्यन्त महाराज गङ्गेव यमुनान्तरा
The Magadha king followed that large array of cars. those that protected the elephants, numbered six millions. The foot-soldiers, who marched in advance, armed with bows, swords and shields, numbered many hundred thousands. They fought with their nails and darts. O descendant of Bharata, O great king, your son's eleven Akshauhini of soldiers looked like Ganga separated from the Yamuna.

धृतराष्ट्र उवाच अक्षौहिण्यो दशैका च व्यूढा दृष्ट्वा युधिष्ठिरः। कथमल्पेन सैन्येन प्रत्यव्यूहत पाण्डवः
Dhritarashtra said Having seen our eleven Akshauhinis placed in battle array, how did Yudhishthira the son of Pandu, make his counter-array with his troops which were smaller than ours?

यो वेद मानुषं व्यूहं दैवं गान्धर्वमासुरम्। कथं भीष्मं स कौन्तेयः प्रत्यव्यूहत संजय
O Sanjaya, how did the son of Kunti form his counter array of troops against Bhishma who knew all kinds of Vyuhas, those of the celestial, the Gandharvas, the Asuras and the men.

संजय उवाच धार्तराष्ट्राण्यनीकानि दृष्ट्वा व्यूढानि पाण्डवः। अभ्यभाषत धर्मात्मा धर्मराजो धनंजयम्
Sanjaya said seeing the troops of the Kurus placed in battle-array, the virtuous minded son of Pandu, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, thus spoke spoke to Dhananjaya (Arjuna).

महर्षेर्वचनात् तात वेदयन्ति बृहस्पतेः। संहतान् योधयेदल्पान् कामं विस्तारयेद् बहून्
We know from the words of Brihaspati that few (troops) must be made to fight be forming them in a solid array, and many may be expanded according to pleasure.

सूचीमुखमनीकं स्यादल्पानां बहुभिः सह। अस्माकं च तथा सैन्यमल्पीयः सुतरां परैः
When a few have to fight with many, the Vyuha should be made the Needle mounted. Our troops in comparison to those of our enemies are but few.

एतद् वचनमाज्ञाय महर्षेव्यूह पाण्डव। एतच्छ्रुत्वा धर्मराजं प्रत्यभाषत पाण्डवः
O son of Pandu, keeping always in mind this precept of the great Rishi, array our troops". Having heard this, the Pandava thus spoke to Dharmaraja Yudhishthira.

एष व्यूहामि ते व्यूहं राजसत्तम दुर्जयम्। अचलं नाम वज्राख्यं विहितं वज्रपाणिना
O foremost of kings, that immovable Vyuha called Vajra which was designed by the wielder of thunderbolt (Indra), that impenetrable Vyuha I shall make today.

यः स वात इवोद्भूतः समरे दुःसहः परैः। स नः पुरो योत्स्यते वै भीमः प्रहरतां वरः
He who is like a raging tempest, he who is irresistible in battle by any foe, that foremost of heroes. Bhima, will fight at the head of our troops.

तेजांसि रिपुसैन्यानां मृद्नन् पुरुषसत्तमः। अग्रऽग्रणीर्योत्स्यति नो युद्धोपायविचक्षणः
That foremost of men who knows all the appliances of battle, becoming our leader, will stand in front of our army, and crush the prowess of the enemy's troops.

यं दृष्ट्वा कुरवः सर्वे दुर्योधनपुरोगमाः। निवर्तिष्यन्ति संत्रस्ताः सिहं क्षुद्रमृगा यथा तं सर्वे संश्रयिष्यामः प्राकारमकुतोभयाः। भीमं प्रहरतां श्रेष्ठं देवराजमिवामराः
That foremost of all warriors, Bhima, will lead us, seeing whom all the warriors, headed by Duryodhana, will fly in terror as small animals fly at the sight of a lion. Our fears being all dispelled, we shall all seck his shelter as if he were a wall, as the celestial seeks the shelter of Indra."

न हि सोऽस्ति पुमाँल्लोके य: संक्रुद्धं वृकोदरम्। द्रष्टुमत्युग्रकर्माणं विषहेत नरर्षभम्
There breathes none in the world who can cast his eye on the foremost of men, Vrikodara of fearful deeds, when he is enraged.

भीमसेनो गदां बिभ्रद् वज्रसारमयीं दृढाम्। चरन् वेगेन महता समुद्रमपि शोषयेत् कैकयो धृष्टकेतुश्च चेकितानश्च वीर्यवान्। एते तिष्ठन्ति सामान्याः प्रेक्षन्तस्ते जनाधिप
Along with the Kaikeya brothers and Dhrishtaketu and the greatly courageous Chekitana. Bhimasena the wielder of the mace made of the hardest metal, moving with fearful speed, can dry up even the sea.

धृतराष्ट्रस्य दायादा इति बीभत्सुरब्रवीत्। भीमसेनं तदा राजन् दर्शयस्व महाबलम्
"O king (look) the sons of Dhritarashtra with their counsellors look on him". O king, pointing out Bhimasena, this was what Bibhatsu (Arjuna) spoke.

ब्रुवाणं तु तथा पार्थं सर्वसैन्यानि भारत। अपूजयंस्तदा वाग्भिरनुकूलाभिराहवे
O descendant of Bharata, when Partha (Arjuna) was thus speaking, all the troops worshipped him on the field of battle with congratulatory words.

एवमुक्त्वा महाबाहुस्तथा चक्रे धनंजयः। व्यूह्य तानि बलान्याशु प्रययौ फाल्गुनस्तथा
Having said this, the mighty-armed Dhananjaya (Arjuna), did as he said. Phalguna (Arjuna) quickly placing his troops in battlearray, marched against the enemy.

सम्प्रयातान् कुरून् दृष्ट्वा पाण्डवानां महाचमूः। गङ्गेव पूर्णा स्तिमिता स्पन्दमाना व्यदृश्यत
Seeing the Kuru army on the march, the great Pandava army appeared like the full, immovable and rolling and surging Ganga.

भीमसेनोऽग्रणीस्तेषां धृष्टद्युम्नश्च वीर्यवान्। नकुलः सहदेवश्च दृष्टकेतुश्च पार्थिवः
Bhimasena, the greatly powerful Dhrishtadyumna, Nakula and Sahadeva and king Dhrishtaketu become the several leaders of the (Pandava) force.

विराटश्च ततः पश्चाद् राजाऽथाक्षौहिणीवृतः। भ्रातृभिः सह पुत्रैश्च सोऽभ्यरक्षत पृष्ठतः
The king Virata, accompanied by his brothers and sons, and surrounded by one Akshauhini of soldiers, marched in the rear and protected the army from behind.

चक्ररक्षौ तु भीमस्य माद्रीपुत्रौ महाद्युती। द्रौपदेयाः ससौभद्राः पृष्ठगोपास्तरस्विनः धृष्टद्युम्नश्च पाञ्चाल्यस्तेषां गोप्ता महारथः। सहितः पृतनाशूरै रथमुख्यैः प्रभद्रकैः शिखण्डी तु ततः पश्चादर्जुनेनाभिरक्षितः। यत्तो भीष्मविनाशाय प्रययौ भरतर्षभ
The greatly effulgent twin sons of Madri (Nakula and Sahadeva) became the protectors of Bhima's chariot. The sons of Draupadi and the son of Subhadra, all possessing great heroism, protected him from behind. Behind him stood Shikhandin, who was protected by Arjuna. O best of the Bharata race, he advanced with the firm determination to kill Bhishma.

पृष्ठतोऽप्यर्जुनस्यासीद् युयुधानो महाबलः। चक्ररक्षौ तु पाञ्चाल्यौ युधामन्यूत्तमौजसौ
Behind Arjuna stood the mighty Yuyudhana; and the two Panchala princes, Yudhamanyu add Uttamaujas protected Arjuna's chariot.

राजा तु मध्यमानीके कुन्तीपुत्रो युधिष्ठिरः। बृहद्भिः कुञ्चरैर्मत्तैश्चलद्भिरचलैरिव
Then king Yudhishthira, surrounded by huge and various elephants each resembling a moving hill, took up his position in the centre of the army.

अक्षौहिण्याथ पाञ्चाल्यो यज्ञसेनो महामनाः। विराटमन्वयात् पश्चात् पाण्डवार्थं पराक्रमी
The illustration Yajnasena the greatly powerful Panchala king placed himself behind Virata (king) with one Akshauhini of soldiers.

तेषामादित्यचन्द्राभाः कनकोत्तमभूषणाः। नानाचित्रधरा राजन् रथेष्वासन् महाध्वजाः
O king, the standards of those kings, cars bore various devices. They were all adorned with excellent ornaments of gold. They were as effulgent as the moon or the sun.

समुत्सार्य ततः पश्चाद् धृष्टद्युम्नो महारथः। भ्रातृभिः सह पुत्रैश्च सोऽभ्यरक्षद् युधिष्ठिरम्
Asking the kings to move onward the great car-warrior Dhrishtadyumna accompanied by his brothers and sons, protected Yudhishthira from behind.

त्वदीयानां परेषां न रथेषु विपुलान् ध्वजान्। अभिभूयार्जुनस्यैको रथे तस्थौ महाकपिः
Shadowing all the great standards of the cars on your side, a huge ape stood (as standard) on Arjuna's car.

पादातास्त्वग्रतोऽगच्छन्नसिशक्त्वृष्टिपाणयः। अनेकशतसाहस्रा भीमसेनस्य रक्षिणः
Many hundreds and thousands of footsoldiers, armed with swords, spears and scimitars, marched ahead protecting Bhimsena.

वारणा दशसाहस्राः प्रभिन्नकरटामुखाः। शूरा हेममयैर्जालैर्दीप्यमाना इवाचलाः क्षरन्त इव जीमूता महार्हाः पद्मगन्धिनः। राजानमन्वयुः पश्चाज्जीमूता इव वार्षिकाः
Ten thousand elephants with juice trickling down their checks and mouth, each endued with great courage, each as huge as a hill, each blazing with golden caparisons, each emitting the fragrance of lotuses, followed the king like so many moving mountains.

भीमसेनो गदां भीमा प्रकर्षन् परिघोपमाम्। प्रचकर्ष महासैन्यं दुराधर्षो महामनाः
The illustrious and invincible Bhimasena, whirling his fearful mace loO king like a parigha (weapon), seemed to crush your sons' sons' army.

तमर्कमिव दुष्प्रेक्ष्यं तपन्तमिव वाहिनीम्। न शेकुः सर्वयोधास्ते प्रतिवीक्षितुमन्तिके
He was incapable of being looked at like the sun. He was scorching, as it were, the enemy army. None of the warriors could even look at him from a near point.

वज्रो नामेष स व्यूहो निर्भयः सर्वतोमुखः। चापविद्युद्ध्वजो घोरो गुप्तो गाण्डीवधन्वना
This Vyuha, called Vajra, with its face turned to all sides, had, as it were, the bows (of the warriors) as its lightnings. This extremely fearful Vyuha was protected by the wielder of Gandiva (Arjuna).

यं प्रतिव्यूह्य तिष्ठन्ति पाण्डवास्तव वाहिनीम्। अजेयो मानुषे लोके पाण्डवैरभिरक्षितः
Thus placing their troops in this counterarray, the Pandavas waited for battle, Protected as it was by the Pandavas that Vyuha became impenetrable in the world.

संध्यां तिष्ठत्सु सैन्येषु सूर्यस्योदयनं प्रति। प्रावात् सपृषतो वायुर्निरभ्रे स्तनयित्नुमान्
At the dawn of day when the armies were waiting for the sunrise, a wind began to blow with drops of water. Though there were no clouds, yet the roars of thunder were heard.

विष्वग्वाताश्च विवर्नीचैः शर्करकर्षिणः रजश्योद्भूयत महत् तम आच्छादयज्जगत्
Dry winds began to blow from all sides, carrying showers of sharp pointed stones and pebbles. A thick dust rose and covered the world with darkness.

पपात महती चोल्का प्राङ्मुखी भरतर्षभ। उद्यन्तं सूर्यमाहत्य व्यशीर्यत महास्वना
O best of the Bharata race, large meteors fell, and striking the rising sun, they fell in fragments with loud noise.

अथ संनह्यमानेषु सैन्येषु भरतर्षभ। निष्प्रभोऽभ्युद्ययौ सूर्यः सघोषं भूश्चचाल च व्यशीर्यत सनादा च भूस्तदा भरतर्षभ। निर्घाता बहवो राजन् दिक्षु सर्वासु चाभवन्
O foremost of the Bharata race, when the armies thus stood in battle-array the sun rise bereft of its splendor and the earth trembled with loud sounds. The roars of thunder were again and again heard on all sides.

प्रादुरासीद् रजस्तीवं न प्राज्ञायत किंचन। ध्वजानां धूयमानानां सहसा मातरिश्वना किङ्किणीजालबद्धानां काञ्चनस्रग्वराम्बरैः। महतां सपताकानामादित्यसमतेजसाम् सर्वं झणझणीभूतमासीत् तालवनेष्विव। एवं ते पुरुषव्याघ्राः पाण्डवा युद्धनन्दिनः व्यवस्थिताः प्रतिव्यूह्य तव पुत्रस्य वाहिनीम्। असन्त इव मज्जा नो योधानां भरतर्षभ दृष्ट्वाऽग्रतो भीमसेनं गदापाणिमवस्थितम्
So thick was the dust that rose that nothing could be seen. The high standards (on the cars) adorned with strings of bells, decked with golden ornaments, garlands of flowers and rich cloths and graced with banners, and loO king like the sun in splendor, being suddenly shaken by the wind gave out a loud jingling noise like that of a forest of palmyra trees. having thus placed their troops in battle-array against the army of your son, and sucking, as it were, the marrow of our warriors and warriors and loO king at Bhimsena who stood at the head of the army with his mace in hand, it was thus that those foremost of men, the Pandavas, who over take delight in battle, stood.

धृतराष्ट्र उवाच सूर्योदये संजय के नु पूर्व युयुत्सवो हृष्यमाणा इवासन्। मामका वा भीष्मनेत्रा: समीपे पाण्डवा वा भीमनेत्रास्तदानीम्
Dhritarashtra said O Sanjaya, when the sun rose, of the two armies, one commanded by Bhishma and the other by Bhima, which first cheerfully met the other, desirous as they were both to fight?

केषां जघन्यौ सोमसूर्यो सवायू केषां सेनां श्वापदाश्चाभषन्त। केषां यूनां मुखवर्णाः प्रसन्नाः सर्वं ह्येतद् ब्रूहि मेवं यथावत्
To which side were the sun, the moons and the wind adverse? Against whom did the beasts of prey utter inauspicious sounds? Who were those young heroes whose countenances were ever cheerful? Tell me all this in detail.

संजय उवाच उभे सेने तुल्यमिवोपयाते उभे व्यूहे हृष्टरूपे नरेन्द्र। उभे चित्रे वनराजिप्रकाशे तथैवोभे नागरथाश्वपूर्णे
Sanjaya said O king, when placed in battle-array, both the armies were equally cheerful. Both the armies looked equally beautiful. They looked like two blossoming woods, and they were full of elephants, cars and horses.

उभे सेने बृहत्यौ भीमरूपे तथैवोभे भारत दुर्विषो। तथैवोभे स्वर्गजयाय सृष्टे तथैवोभे सत्पुरुषोपजुष्टे
O descendant of Bharata, both the armies were huge and fearful. None of the them could bear the other. Both of them were arrayed as if they would conquer the very heavens. Both of them consisted of excellent soldiers.

पश्चान्मुखाः कुरवो धार्तराष्ट्राः स्थिताः पार्थाः प्राङ्मुखा योत्स्यमानाः। दैत्येन्द्रसेनेव च कौरवाणं देवेन्द्रसेनेव च पाण्डवानाम्
The armies of Dhritarashtra's party stood facing the west, the Pandavas stood facing the cast, all ready for fight. The Kuru troops looked like the army of the Danava chief, while the Pandava troops looked like the army of the celestial.

चक्रे वायुः पृष्ठतः पाण्डवानां धार्तराष्ट्राश्वापदा व्यारहन्त। गजेन्द्राणां मदग्न्धांश्च तीव्रान् न सेहिरे तव पुत्रस्य नागाः
The wind blew from behind the Pandavas. The beasts of prey yelled, from behind the troops of your sons. The elephants, belonging to your son, could not bear the strong odour of the juice emitted by the large (Pandava) elephants.

दुर्योधनो हस्तिनं पद्मवर्णं सुवर्णकक्षं जालवन्तं प्रभिन्नम्। समास्थितो मध्यगतः कुरूणां संस्तूयमानो वन्दिभिर्मागधैश्च
Duryodhana rode on a lotus-complexioned elephant with its temples rent, adorned with a golden Kaksha and clad in steel armour. He was in the very centre of the Kurus. He was being adored by eulogists and bards.

चन्द्रप्रभ श्वेतमथातपत्रं सौवर्णस्रग् भ्राजति चोत्तमाङ्गे। तं सर्वतः शकुनिः पर्वतीयैः सार्धं गान्धारैर्याति गान्धारराजः भीष्मोऽग्रतः सर्वसैन्यस्य वृद्धः श्वेतच्छत्र: श्वेतधनुः सखङ्गः। श्वेतोष्णीषः पाण्डुरेण ध्वजेन श्वेतैरश्चैः श्वेतशैलप्रकाशैः
A white umbrella adorned with a golden chain, as effulgent as the moon, was held over his head. The ruler of Gandhara, Shakuni, followed him with innumerable mountaineers of Gandhara. The venerable Bhishina was at the head of the army. With a white umbrella held over his head with a white head dress (on his head) with a white bow and sword in his hand), with a white banner (on his car) and with white horses (yoked to his car) he looked like a (great) white mountain.

तस्य सैन्ये धार्तराष्ट्राश्च सर्वे बाह्रीकानामेकदेशः शलश्च। स्तथा सौवीराः पञ्चनदाश्च शूराः
In the division that was under Bhishma's direct command, were all the of Dhritarashtra, also Sala who was a countryman of the Balhikas, also all those Kshatriya called Ambashtas, also the heroic dwellers of the country of the five rivers.

शौणैर्हयै रुक्मरथो महात्मा द्रोणो धनुष्पाणिरदीनसत्त्वः। आस्ते गुरुः प्रायशः सर्वराज्ञां पश्चाच्च भूमीन्द्र इवाभियाति
The illustrious Drona, the preceptor of almost all the kings, with a bow in hand and with never-falling heart, stationed on a golden sons car yoked with red horses, remained behind all the troops thus protecting them like Indra.

वार्धक्षत्रिः सर्वसैन्यस्य मध्ये भूरिश्रवाः पुरुमित्रो जयश्च। शाल्वा मत्स्याः केकयाश्चेति सर्वे गजानीकैर्धातरो योत्स्यमानाः
In the midst of all the troops fought Vardhakshatri, Bhurishrava, Purumitra, Jaya, and the Shalvas, the Matsyas and all the Kaikeyas with their elephants crops.

शारद्वतकोत्तरधूर्महात्मा महेष्वासो गौतमश्चित्रयोधी। शकैः किरातैर्यवनैः पल्हवैश्छ सार्धं चमूमुत्तरतोऽभियाति
The son of Sharadvata, the warrior who ever fights in the front, that illustrious great bow-man called Gautama, learned in all the modes of warfare, took up his position in the northern portion of the army with the Shakas, the Kiratas, the Yavanas and the Pallavas.

महारथैर्वृष्णिभोजैः सुगुप्तं सुराष्ट्रकैर्विहितैरात्तशस्त्रैः। बृहद् बलं कृतवर्माभिगुप्तं बलं त्वदीयं दक्षिणेनाभियाति
That large force which was well protected by the great car-warriors of the Vrishni and the Bhoja race and also by the warriors of Saurashtra, all well armed and well-skilled in the use of arms, the force which was under the command of Kritavarmana marched to the south of your army.

संशप्तकानामयुतं रथानां मृत्युर्जयो वाऽर्जुनस्येति सृष्टाः। येनार्जुनस्तेन राजन् कृतास्त्राः प्रयातारस्ते त्रिगर्ताश्च शूराः
Ten thousand Sanshaptaka car-warriors who were created for cither the death of the fame of Arjuna, who were all greatly accomplished in arms, who intended to follow. Arjuna at every step, marched out with the Trigartas.

साचं शतसहस्रं तु नागानां तव भारत। नागे नागे रथशतं शतमश्वा रथे रथे अश्वेऽश्वे दश धानुष्का धानुष्के शतचर्मिणः। एवं व्यूढान्यनीकानि भीष्मेण तव भारत
O descendant of Bharata in your ariny, there were one hundred thousand elephants of the greatest fighting powers. To each elephant was assigned one hundred car-warriors, to each car was assigned one hundred horse men, to each horsemen, ten bowmen, to each bow-men, ten soldiers armed with shield. Thus, O descendant of Bharata, were your troops placed by Bhishma in battle array.

संव्यूह्य मानुषं व्यूहं दैवं गान्धर्वमासुरम्। दिवसे दिवसे प्राप्ते भीष्मः शान्तनवोऽग्रणीः
On every succeeding morning your generalissimo Bhishma, the son of Shantanu, sometimes placed your troops in the human sometime in the celestial, sometimes in the Gandharva and sometimes in the Asura Vyuhas.

महारथौघविपुलः समुद्र इव घोषवान्। भीष्मेण धार्तराष्ट्राणां व्यूहः प्रत्यङ्मुखो युधि
With innumerable great car-warriors, roaring like the very ocean, the arıny of Dhritarashtra's son, arrayed by Bhishma, stood ready for battle, facing the west.

अनन्तरूपा ध्वजिनी नरेन्द्र भीमात्वदीया न तु पाण्डवानाम्। तां चैव मन्ये बृहती दुष्प्रधर्षां यस्या नेता केशवश्चार्जुनश्च
O king, your army looked terrible but the Pandava army appeared to me very large and invincible, for Arjuna and Krishna were its leaders.

संजय उवाच वृहती धार्तराष्ट्रस्य सेनां दृष्ट्वा समुद्यताम्। विषादमगमद् राजा कुन्तीपुत्रो युधिष्ठिरः
Sanjaya said Seeing the vast army of Dhritarashtra's son, the son of Kunti, king Yudhishthira, was filled with grief.

व्यूह भीष्मेण चाभेद्यं कल्पितं प्रेक्ष्य पाण्डवः। अभेद्यमिव सम्प्रेक्ष्य विवर्णोऽर्जुनमब्रवीत्
Having seen the impenetrable Vyuha formed by Bhishma and having concluded it to be really impenetrable, the king became pale and he thus spoke to Arjuna.

धनंजय कथं शक्यमस्माभिर्यो माहवे। धार्तराष्टैर्महाबाहो येषां योद्धा पितामहः
"O mighty armed hero, O Dhananjaya, how shall be able to fight with the Dhritarashtra's son's army when the grandfather himself commands it.

अक्षोभ्योऽयमभेद्यश्च भीष्मेणामित्रकर्षिणा। कल्पितः शास्त्रदृष्टेन विधिना भूरिवर्चसा
Immovable and impenetrable in this Vyuha, formed according to the rules of the Shastras, by that chastiser of foes, Bhishma of unfading glory.

ते वयं संशयं प्राप्ताः ससैन्याः शत्रुकर्षण। कथमस्मान्महाव्यूहादुस्थानं नो भविष्यति
O chastiser of foes, we are doubtful of success. How can victory be ours in the face of this (Kuru) army?

अथार्जुनोऽब्रवीत् पार्थं युधिष्ठिरममित्रहा। विषण्णमिव सम्प्रेक्ष्य तव राजन्ननीकिनीम्
O king, that chastiser of foes, Arjuna, thus spoke of your army to the son of Pritha, Yudhishthira, who was in great grief.

प्रज्ञयाभ्यधिकाञ्शूरान् गुणयुक्तान् बहूनपि। जयन्त्यल्पतरा येन तन्निबोध विशाम्पते
we O majesty! I tell you the manner by which handful warriors conquer the wiser and meritorious majority of warriors. Please, listen to it carefully.

तत्र ते कारणं राजन् प्रवक्ष्याम्यनसूयवे। नारदस्तमृषिर्वेद भीष्मद्रोणौ च पाण्डव
O king, you are without malice. I shall therefore tell you of the means. The Rishi Narada as well as Bhishma and Drona know it.

एनमेवार्थमाश्रित्य युद्धे देवासुरेऽब्रवीत्। पितामहः किल पुरा महेन्द्रादीन् दिवौकसः
In the days of yore, at the battle between the celestial and the Danavas, the Grandfather himself said (the following) to Indra and the other celestial.

न तथा बलवीर्याभ्यां जयन्ति विजिगीषवः। यथा सत्यानृशंस्याभ्यां धर्मेणैवोद्यमेन च
They that are desirous of victory do not so much conquer by might and prowess as by truth, compassion, piety and virtue

त्यक्त्वाधर्मं च लोभं च मोहं चोद्यममास्थिताः। युद्ध्यध्वमनहंकारा यतो धर्मस्ततो जयः
Therefore knowing the difference between piety and impiety and understanding what is meant by covetousness and having recourse to only be exertion, fight without any arrogance, for victory is certain to be there, where righteousness is.

एवं राजन् विजानीहि ध्रुवोऽस्माकं रणे जयः। यथा तु नारदः प्राह यतः कृष्णस्ततो जयः
O king, for this reason, know that victory is certain to us in this battle. Narada said, "Victory is certainly there where Krishna is".

गुणभूतो जयः कृष्णे पृष्ठतोऽभ्येति माधवम्। तद् यथा विजयश्चास्य सन्नतिश्चापरो गुणः
Victory is inherent to Krishna; it follows Madhava (Krishna); victory is one of his attributes, so is humility.

अनन्ततेजा गोविन्दः शत्रुपूगेषु निर्व्यथः। पुरुषः सनातनमयो यतः कृष्णस्ततो जयः
Govinda (Krishna) possess might which is infinite. Even in the midst of countless foes, he is without any beyond all pains. He is the most eternal Purusha. Victory is certainly there where Krishna is.

पुरा ह्येष हरिभूत्वा विकुण्ठोऽकुण्ठसायकः। सुरासुरानवस्फूर्णन्नब्रवीत् के जयन्त्विति कथं कृष्णं जयेमेति यैरुक्तं तत्र तैर्जितम्। तत् प्रसादाद्धि त्रैलोक्यं प्राप्तं शक्रादिभिः सुरैः
In the days of yore, indestructible and invincible. Hari appeared and thus spoke loudly to the celestial and the Asuras, “who amongst you would be victorious?” The conquered (the celestial) said, “With Krishna in front we shall win victory”. It was through the grace of Hari that the celestial headed by Indra obtained (the sovereignty) of the three worlds.

तस्य ते न व्यथां काञ्चिदिह पश्यामि भारत। यस्य ते जयमाशास्ते विश्वभुक् त्रिदिवेश्वरः
Therefore I do not find any cause for sorrow., You have the lord of the universe and the lord of the celestial to which victory to you.

संजय उवाच ततो युधिष्ठिरो राजा स्वां सेनां समनोदयत्। प्रतिव्यूहन्ननीकानि भीष्मस्य भरतर्षभ
Sanjaya said 0 best of the Bharata race, then king Yudhishthira, after placing his troops duly in battle-array against the army of Bhishma, thus spoke.

यथोद्दिष्टान्यनीकानि प्रत्यव्यूहन्त पाण्डवाः। स्वर्ग परममिच्छन्तः सुयुद्धेन कुरूद्वहाः
The Pandavas have now placed their troops in counter-array in the way laid down in the Shastras. O sinless ones, fight with fairness with the desire of obtaining the highest heaven.

मध्ये शिखण्डिनोऽनीकं रक्षितं सव्यसाचिना। धृष्टद्युन्नश्चरन्नग्रे भीमसेनेन पालितः
In the centre stood Shikhandin and his men protected by Arjuna. Dhrishtadyumna was in the front protected by Bhima.

अनीकं दक्षिणं राजन् युयुधानेन पालितम्। श्रीमता सात्वदाचयेण शक्रेणेव धनुष्मता
O king, the southern division of the army was protected by that great bowman, the handsome Yuyudhana, that foremost of the Satvata heroes, who was equal to Indra himself.

महेन्द्रयानप्रतिम रथं तु सोपस्करं हाटकरत्नचित्रम्। युधिष्ठिरः काञ्चनभाण्डयोक्त्रं समास्थितो नागपुरस्य मध्ये
Yudhishthira was on a car which was worthy of carrying Indra himself. It was adorned with an excellent standard decked with gold and gems. It was furnished with golden traces. He stood in the midst of his elephant corps.

समुच्छ्रितं दन्तशलाकमस्य सुपाण्डुरं छत्रमतीव भाति। प्रदक्षिणं चैनमुपाचरन्त महर्षयः संस्तुतिभिर्महेन्द्रम्
His milk-white umbrella, with ivory handle, held over his head, looked exceedingly beautiful. Many great Rishis walked round the king uttering the words of praise.

पुरोहिताः शत्रुवधं वदन्तो ब्रह्मर्षिसिद्धाः श्रुतवन्त एनम्। जप्यैश्च मन्त्रैश्च महौषधीभिः समन्ततः स्वस्त्ययनं ब्रुवन्तः
Many priests, Brahmanas, Rishis, Siddhas, as they walked round him, chanted hymns in his praise. They wished him the destruction of his enemies by the help of Tapas and mantras, efficacious drugs and various propitiatory ceremonies.

ततः स वस्त्राणि तथैव गाश्च फलानि पुष्पाणि तथैव निष्कान्। कुरूत्तमो ब्राह्मणसान्महात्मा कुर्वन् ययौ शक्र इवामरेशः
The illustrious Kuru chief then gave away to the Brahmanas kine, fruits, flowers, golden coins and cloths. He marched like Indra, the chief of the celestial.

सहस्रसूर्यः शतकिङ्किणीकः पराय॑जाम्बूनदहेमचित्रः। रथोऽर्जुनस्याग्निरिवार्चिमाली विभ्राजते श्वेतहयः सुचक्रः
Arjuna's car, furnished with hundreds of bells, decked with gold, fitted with excellent wheels, endued with the effulgence of fire and yoked with best steeds, looked as brilliant as one thousand suns.

तमास्थितः केशवसंगृहीतं कपिध्वजो गाण्डिवबाणपाणिः। धनुर्धरो यस्य समः पृथिव्यां न विद्यते नो भविता कदाचित्
On this (grand) car, which was driven by Keshava (Krishna) stood the ape-bannered hero with Gandiva (bow) and arrows in his hand, a great bow man whose equal there is none of earth or none will be.

उद्वर्तयिष्यंस्तव पुत्रसेनामतीव रौद्रं स बिभर्ति रूपम्। अनायुधो यः सुभुजो भुजाभ्यां नराश्वनागान् युधि भस्म कुर्यात् सहितो यमाभ्यां वृकोदरो वीररथस्य गोप्ता। तं तत्र सिंहर्षभमत्तखेलं लोके महेन्द्रप्रतिमानकल्पम् समीक्ष्य सेनाग्रगतं दुरासदं संविव्यथुः पङ्कगता यथा द्विपाः। वृकोदरं वारणराजदएँ योधास्त्वदीया भयविग्नसत्त्वाः स भीमसेनः
He who assumes the most terrible appearance for crushing your sons, he who without any weapon but only with his bare arms pounds to dust men, horses and elephants, that mighty armed Bhimasena that Vrikodara, accompanied by the twins (Nakula and Sahadeva) protected the (Pandava) warriors. Seeing the invincible Vrikodara like a fearful lion of sportive gait, like a proud leader of a herd of elephants, like the great Indra himself, your soldiers, with their strength weakened by fear, began to tremble like elephants sunk in mud.

अनीकमध्ये तिष्ठन्तं राजपुत्रं दुरासदम्। अब्रवीद् भरतश्रेष्ठः गुडाकेशं जनार्दनः
O best of the Bharata race, then Janardana (Krishna) thus spoke to that invincible hero Gudakesha standing in the midst of his troops.

वासुदेव उवाच य एष रोषात् प्रतपन् बलस्थो यो नः सेनां सिह इवेक्षते च। येनाहृतास्त्रिशतं वाजिमेधाः
He who scorches us with his wrath, he who stays in the midst of his force, he who will attack our troops like a lion, he who has performed three hundred Ashvamedha sacrifices, that banner of the Kuru race, that Bhishma, is yonder.

एतान्यनीकानि महानुभावं गृहन्ति मेघा इव रश्मिमन्तम्। एतानि हत्वा पुरुषप्रवीर काङ्क्षस्व युद्धं भरतर्षभेण
Innumerable troops cover him on all sides as the clouds cover the bright luminary, the sun. O best of men, killing the troops, fight with that foremost chief of Bharata race.

संजय उवाच धार्तराष्ट्रबलं दृष्ट्वा युद्धाय समुपस्थितम्। अर्जुनस्य हितार्थाय कृष्णो वचनमब्रवीत्
Sanjaya said Having seen the army of Dhritarashtra's son approach with the desire to fight, Krishna spoke these words to Arjuna for his benefit.

श्रीभगवानुवाच शुचिर्भूत्वा महाबाहो संग्रामाभिमुखे स्थितः। पराजयाय शत्रूणां दुर्गास्तोत्रमुदीरय
The Deity said “O mighty-armed hero, purifying yourself, utter, on the even of battle, the hymn to Durga, so that you may defeat the foe".

संजय उवाच एवमुक्तोऽर्जुन: संख्ये वासुदेवेन धीमता। अवतीर्य रथात् पार्थः स्तोत्रमाह कृताञ्जलिः
Sanjaya said Being thus addressed by the greatly wise Vasudeva, the son of Pritha, Arjuna alighted from his car and chanted the following hymn with joined hands.

अर्जुन उवाच नमस्ते सिद्धसेनानि आर्ये मन्दरवासिनि। कुमारि कालि कापालि कपिले कृष्णपिङ्गले
Arjuna said O lord of the Yogins, O dweller of Mandara forest, O identified Deity with Brahma, I bow to you. O Goddess free from decrepitude and decay, O Kali, O wife of Kapala, O Deity of black and brown colour,

भद्रकालि नमस्तुभ्यं महाकालि नमोऽस्तु ते। चण्डि चण्डे नमस्तुभ्यं तारिणि वरवर्णिनि
I bow to you. O giver of benefits to your devotecs, O Mahakali, I bow to you. O wife of the universal destroyer, I bow to you. O proud one, O rescuer from dangers, O possessor of every auspicious attribute, I bow to you.

कात्यायनि महाभागे करालि विजये जये। शिखिपिच्छध्वजधरे नानाभरणभूषिते
O goddess who has sprung from the Katar ace, O worshipped of all, O fearful one, O giver of victory, O victory itself, O bearer of the banner of peacocks plumes, O wearer of ornaments.

अट्टशूलप्रहरणे खगखेटकधारिणि। गोपेन्द्रस्यानुजे ज्येष्ठे नन्दगोपकुलोद्भवे
O wielder of fearful spear, O holder of sword and shield, O the younger sister of the cowherd chief, O eldest one, O goddess born in the race of Nandagopa,

महिषासक्प्रिये नित्यं कौशिकि पीतवासिनि। अट्टहासे कोकमुखे नमस्तेऽस्तु रणप्रिये
O lover of buffalo's blood, o deity born in the race of Kushika, O wearer of yellow robes, O devourer of Asuras, O lover of battle, I bow to you.

उमे शाकम्भरि श्वेते कृष्णे कैटभनाशिनि। हिरण्याक्षि विरूपाक्षि सुधूम्राक्षि नमोऽस्तु ते वेदश्रुति महापुण्ये ब्रह्मण्ये जातवेदसि। जम्बूकटकचैत्येषु नित्य सन्निहितालये
O Uma, O Shakambhari, O white-coloured deity, O black-coloured goddess, O destroyer of Kaitabha Asura, O yellow-eyed one, O various eyed one, O smoke coloured eyed one, I bow to you. You are the Vedas, you are the Shrutis, you are the highest virtue. You are propitious to Brahmanas who are engaged in sacrifices, you posses the knowledge of the past, you are ever present in the sacred abodes erected in your honour in the Jambudvipa.

त्वं ब्रह्मविद्या विद्यानां महानिद्रा च देहिनाम्। स्कन्दमातर्भगवति दुर्गे कान्तारवासिनि
You are the science of Brahma among sciences, you are that sleep of creatures, which has no waking, C_mother of Skanda, O possessor of the six attributes, O Durga, O dweller of inaccessible regions,

भवतु मे नित्यं स्वाहाकारः स्वधा चैव कला काष्ठा सरस्वती। सावित्रि वेदमाता च तथा वेदान्त उच्यते
You are described as svaha, as svadha as Kala, as Kashta, as Sarasvati, as Savitri, the mother of the Vedas and as the science of the Vedanta.

स्तुताऽसि त्वं महादेवि विशुद्धनान्तरात्मना। जयो मे नित्यं त्वत्प्रसादाद रणाजिरे
O great goddess with my inner soul purified, I adore you. Let, through your grace, victory always attend me in the field of battle.

कान्तारभयदुर्गेषु भक्तानां चालयेषु च। नित्यं वससि पाताले युद्धे जयसि दानवान्
You always live in inaccessible regions where there is fear, in places of difficulty, in the abodes of your worshippers and in the nether region. You always anguish the Asuras.

त्वं जम्भनी मोहिनी च माया ह्रीः श्रीस्तथैव च। संध्या प्रभावती चैव सावित्री जननी तथा
You are consciousness, you are sleep, you are illusion, you are modesty, you are beauty. You are the twilight's, you are the day, you are Savitri, you are the mother.

तुष्टिः पुष्टिकृतिर्दीप्तिश्चन्द्रादित्यविवर्धिनी। भूतिभूतिमतां सङ्घये वीक्ष्यसे सिद्धचारणैः।।
You are contentment, you are growth you are light, you support the sun and the moon, you make them shine. You are the prosperity of those that are prosperous. The Siddhas and the Charanas see you in the Samadhi.

संजय उवाच ततः पार्थस्य विज्ञाय भक्ति मानववत्सला। अन्तरिक्षगतोवाच गोविन्दस्याग्रतः स्थिता
Sanjaya said Knowing Partha's (Arjuna's) great devotion, Durga, who is always graciously inclined towards mankind, appeared in the sky. In the presence of Govinda (Krishna) she thus spoke to Arjuna.

देव्युवाच स्वल्पेनैव तु कालेन शत्रूञ्जेष्यसि पाण्डव। नरस्त्वमसि दुर्धर्ष नारायणसहायवान्
The goddess said O son of Pandu, you will vanquish your enemy in no time. O invincible one. You have Narayana himself to help you.

अजेयस्त्वं रणेऽरीणामपि वज्रभृतः स्वयम्। इत्येवमुक्त्वा वरदा क्षणेनान्तरधीयत
You are incapable of being defeated by any foe, not even by the wielder of thunder-bolt (Indra). Having said this, that boon-giving goddess disappeared.

लब्ध्वा वरं तु कौन्तेयो मेने विजयमात्मनः। आरुरोह ततः पार्थो रथं परमसम्मतम्
The son of Kunti (Arjuna), considered himself blessed by obtaining that boon. Partha then mounted his excellent chariot.

कृष्णार्जुनावेकरथौ दिव्यौ शङ्खौ प्रदध्मतुः। य इदं पठते स्तोत्र कल्य उत्थाय मानवः
Then Krishna and Arjuna, both seated in one car, blew their celestial conchs. The man, who chants this hymn in the morning.

यक्षरक्ष:पिशाचेभ्यो न भयं विद्यते सदा। न चापि रिपवस्तेभ्यः सर्पाद्या ये च दंष्ट्रिणः न भयं विद्यते तस्य सदा राजकुलादपि। विवादे जयमाप्नोति बद्धो मुच्यति बन्धनात्
Has nothing to fear from the Yakshas, the Rakshasas and Pishachas,. He will have no enemies. He will have no fear from snakes and all animals that have poisonous stings and teeth, and also from kings. He is certain to win victory in all disputes. If bound, he will be freed from the bonds.

दुर्गं तरति चावश्यं तथा चौरैर्विमुच्यते। संग्रामे विजयेन्नित्यं लक्ष्मी प्राप्नोति केवलाम्
He is certain to get over all difficulties, be is certain to be freed from thieves. He will ever win victory, and the goddess of prosperity.

आरोग्यबलसम्पन्नो जीवेद् वर्षशतं तथा। एतद् दृष्टं प्रसादात् तु मया व्यासस्य धीमतः द्वैपायनो नारदश्च
He will live with health and strength for one hundred years. I have known all this through the grace of the greatly wise Vyasa.

मोहादेतौ न जानन्ति नरनारायणवृषी। तव पुत्रा दुरात्मानः सर्वे मन्युवशानुगाः
Your wicked sons, however, having been entangled in the meshes of death do not, out of ignorance, know them to be Nara and Narayana.

प्राप्तकालमिदं वाक्यं कालपाशेन गुण्ठिताः। कण्वो रामस्तथाऽनघः। अवारयंस्तवं सुतं न चासौ तद् गृहीतवान्। यत्र धर्मो द्युतिः कान्तिर्यत्र ह्रीः श्रीस्तथा मतिः। यतो धर्मस्ततः कृष्णो यतः कृष्णस्ततो जयः
Entangled in the net and death, they do not know that the last hour of their kingdom has come. Dvaipayana (Vyasa) Narada, Kanva, the sinless Rama had dissuaded your son. But he did not accept their words. Where there is piety there are glory and beauty. Where there is modesty there are intelligence and prosperity. Where there is righteousness, there is Krishna, and where there is Krishna, there is victory.

धृतराष्ट्र उवाच केषां प्रहृष्टास्तत्राग्रे योधा युध्यन्ति संजय। उदग्रमनसः के वा के वा दीना विचेतसः
Dhritarashtra said O Sanjaya, the warriors of which side first advanced to the fight? Whose hearts were filled with confidence and who were spiritless from melancholy?

के पूर्वं प्राहरंस्तत्र युद्धे हृदयकम्पने। मामकाः पाण्डवेया वा तन्ममाचक्ष्व संजय
In the great battle that makes every one's heart tremble, who were they who struck the first blow; were they my men or did they belong to the Pandavas? O Sanjaya, tell me all this in detail.

कस्य सेनासमुदये गन्धमाल्यसमुद्भवः। वाचः प्रदक्षिणाश्चैव योधानामभिगर्जताम्
Among whose troops did the garlands of flowers and unguents emit fragrant scents? Whose troops with fearful roars uttered merciful words?

संजय उवाच व्यूढानां उभयोः सेनयोस्तत्र योधा जहषिरे तदा। स्रजः समाः सुगन्धानामुभयत्र समुद्भवः संहतानामनीकानां भरतर्षभ। संसर्गात् समुदीर्णानां विमर्दः सुमहानभूत्
Sanjaya said The warriors of both the armies were cheerful in the beginning. The garlands of flowers and unguents emitted equal fragrance. O best of the Bharata race, fearful was the encounter that took place between the troops arrayed for battle.

वादित्रशब्दस्तुमुलः शङ्खभेरीविमिश्रितः। शूराणां रणशूराणां गर्जतामितरेतरम्। उभयोः सेनयो राजन् महान् व्यतिकरोऽभवत्
The loud sounds of musical instruments, mingled with that of the conches and drums, and the shouts of brave warriors, that rose fearfully roaring at one another, were awful.

अन्योन्यं वीक्ष्यमाणानां योधानां भरतर्षभ। कुञ्जराणां च नदतां सैन्यानां च प्रहृष्यताम्
O best of the Bharata race, dreadful was the battle fought by the troops of both parties all staring at one another and all filled with joy. The elephants uttered terrible roars.

धृतराष्ट्र उवाच धर्मक्षेत्रे कुरुक्षेत्रे समवेता युयुत्सवः। मामकाः पाण्डवाश्चैव किमकुर्वत संजय
Dhritarashtra said What did my sons and the Pandava do, o Sanjaya, when desirous of battle they all assembled on the holy field of Kurukshetra?

संजय उवाच दृष्ट्वा तु पाण्डवानीकं व्यूढं दुर्योधनस्तदा। आचार्यमुपसंगम्य राजा वचनमब्रवीत्
Sanjaya said Seeing the Pandava army in battle array,

पश्यैतां पाण्डुपुत्राणामाचार्य महतीं चमूम्। व्यूढां दुपदपुत्रेण तव शिष्येण धीमता
“Behold, O Preceptor, the grand army of the Pandavas, drawn up in battle array by your intelligent pupil the son of Drupada.

अत्र शूरा महेष्वासा भीमार्जुनसमा युधि। युयुधानो विराटश्च दुपदश्च महारथः
There are in it mighty bowmen, equals of Bhima and Arjuna in battle. There are Yudhishthira, Virata and the great car-warrior Drupada.

धृष्टकेतुश्चेकितानः काशिराजश्च वीर्यवान्। पुरुजित् कुन्तिभोजश्च शैब्यश्च नरपुङ्गवः
There are Dhrishtaketu, Chekitan and valiant king of Kashi, Purujit, Kuntibhoja and that kings of men, Shaivya.

युधामन्युश्च विक्रान्त उत्तमौजाश्च वीर्यवान्। सौभद्रो द्रौपदेयाश्च सर्व एव महारथाः
There are mighty Yudhamanyu, heroic Uttamaujas, Subhadra's son and sons of Draupadi, all great car-warriors.

अस्माकं तु विशिष्टा ये तान् निबोध द्विजोत्तम। नायका मम सैन्यस्य संज्ञार्थं तान् ब्रवीमि ते
O best of Brahmanas, learn, I shall tell you also for your information who are the most distinguished amongst us, and who are the leaders of my army.

भवान् भीष्मश्च कर्णश्च कृपश्च समितिंजयः। अश्वत्थामा विकर्णश्च सौमदत्तिस्तथैव च
Yourself, and Bhishma, and Karna, and ever-victorious Kripa, Ashvatthama, Vikarna and the son of Somadatta.

अन्ये च बहवः शूरा मदर्थे त्यक्तजीविताः। नानाशस्त्रप्रहरणाः सर्वे युद्धविशारदाः
There are (besides these) many warriors, all well-skilled in the art of war and (all) armed with various weapons, ready to die for me.

अपर्याप्तं तदस्माकं बलं भीष्माभिरक्षितम्। पर्याप्तं त्विदमेतेषां बलं भीमाभिरक्षितम्
Our army protected by Bhishma is unlimited (more then sufficient) their army protected by Bhima is limited, (may be sufficient).

अयनेषु च सर्वेषु यथाभागमवस्थिताः। भीष्ममेवाभिरक्षन्तु भवन्तः सर्व एव हि
Therefore all of you, place yourselves at the head of your respective phalanx, and protect (and support) Bhishma only".

तस्य संजनयन् हर्षं कुरुवृद्धः पितामहः। सिंहनादं विनद्योच्चैः शङ्ख दध्मौ प्रतापवान्
Then the older of the Kurus, the mighty Grandsire Bhishma, roaring like a lion, blew his conch, thus affording him (Duryodhana) great delight.

ततः शङ्खच भेर्यश्च पणवानकगोमुखाः। सहसैवाभ्यहन्यन्त स शब्दस्तुमुलोऽभवत्
And then conchs, drums, trumpets and cymbals were all at once sounded, and there rose a great uproar (from all sides).

ततः श्वेतैर्हयैर्युक्ते महति स्यन्दने स्थितौ। माधवः पाण्डवश्चैव दिव्यौ शङ्खौ प्रदध्मतुः
Then Madhava (Srikrishna) and the son of Pandu (Arjuna), seated in a great car yoked with white steeds, blew their celestial conchs.

पाञ्चजन्यं हृषीकेशो देवदत्तं धनंजयः। पौण्ड्रं दध्मौ महाशङ्ख भीमकर्मा वृकोदरः
Hrishikesha blew the Panchajanya, Dhananjaya, Devadatta, and the doer of fearful deeds, Bhima his great conch Paundra.

अनन्तविजयं राजा कुन्तीपुत्रो युधिष्ठिरः। नकुलः सहदेवश्च सुघोषमणिपुष्पकौ
The son of Kunti, king Yudhishthira, Ananta Vijaya and Nakula and Sahadeva Sughosha and Mani Pushpaka respectively.

काश्यश्च परमेष्वासः शिखण्डी च महारथः। धृष्टद्युम्नो विराटश्च सात्यकिश्चापराजितः
The great bowman the king of Kashi the mighty car warrior Shikhandin, Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, and ever-victorious Satyaki.

द्रुपदो द्रौपदेयाश्च सर्वशः पृथिवीपते। सौभद्रश्च महाबाहुः शङ्खान् दध्मुः पृथक् पृथक्
Drupada, and the sons of Draupadi and the mighty armed son of Subhadra, O king of all the world, each blew his conch separately.

स घोषो धार्तराष्ट्राणां हृदयानि व्यदारयत्। नभश्च पृथिवीं चैव तुमुलो व्यनुनादयन्
Echoing heaven and earth, the tumultous din rent the hearts of Dhritarashtra's people.

अथ व्यवस्थितान् दृष्ट्वा धार्तराष्ट्रान् कपिध्वजः। प्रवृत्ते शस्त्रसम्पाते धनुरुद्यम्य पाण्डवः हृषीकेशं तदा वाक्यमिदमाह महीपते।
O king of the world, the ape standard son of Pandu secing Dhritarashtra's people marshalled in battle bent, and missiles having been just began to be discharged, raised up his bow, and spoke thus to Hrishikesh :

अर्जुन उवाच सेनयोरुभयोर्मध्ये रथं स्थापय मेऽच्युत यावदेतान् निरीक्षेऽहं योद्धकामानवस्थितान्। कैर्मया सह योद्धव्यमस्मिन् रणसमुद्यमे
"O undeteriorating one, place my car between the two armies. While I see those who stand here desirous of battle, and with whom I shall have to fight in this war-struggle.

योत्स्यमानानवेक्षेऽहं य एतेऽत्र समागताः। धार्तराष्ट्रस्य दुर्बुद्धेयुद्धे प्रियचिकीर्षवः
I shall see those who have assembled here to fight, wishing to do good to the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra.

संजय उवाच एवमुक्तो हृषीकेशो गुडाकेशेन भारत। सेनयोरुभयोर्मध्ये स्थापयित्वा रथोत्तमम्
Sanjaya said O Bharata, thus addressed by Gudakesha (Arjuna), Hrishikesh, placing the excellent car between the two armies.

भीष्मद्रोणप्रमुखतः सर्वेषां च महीक्षिताम्। उवाच पार्थ पश्यैतान् समवेतान् कुरूनिति
In front of Bhishma, Drona and all the kings of the earth, said, “Behold Partha, the assembled Kaurava".

तत्रापश्यत् स्थितान् पार्थः पितृनथ पितामहान्। आचार्यान् मातुलान् भ्रातृन् पुत्रान् पौत्रान् सखींस्तथा
Partha saw in the two armies fathers, grandfathers, preceptors, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons, friends, fathers-in-law, and well-wishers.

श्वशुरान् सुहृदश्चैव सेनयोरुभयोरपि। तान् समीक्ष्य स कौन्तेयः सर्वान् बन्धूनवस्थितान् कृपया परयाऽऽविष्टो विषीदन्निदमब्रवीत्।
Seeing in the two armies all friends and Kinsmen (present), the son of Kunti was ency said.

अर्जुन उवाच दृष्ट्वेमं स्वजनं कृष्ण युयुत्सु समुपस्थितम् सीदन्ति मम गात्राणि मुखं च परिशुष्यति।
"Seeing, O Hrishikesh, these kinsmen present here with the desire to do battle my limbs are languid, my mouth is dried up.

वेपथुश्च शरीरे मे रोमहर्षश्च जायते गाण्डीवं स्रंसते हस्तांत् त्वक् चैव परिदह्यते।
My body trembles, my hairs stand on end, my Gandiva (bow) slips from my hand and my skin burns.

न च शक्नोम्यवस्थातुं भ्रमतीव च मे मनः निमित्तानि च पश्यामि विपरीतानि केशव।
I am unable to stand, my mind is whirling and I see, O Keshava, evil omens.

न च श्रेयोऽनुपश्यामि हत्वा स्वजनमाहवे न काक्षे विजयं कृष्ण न च राज्यं सुखानि च।
I don't see any good by killing kinsmen in this battle. I desire, O Krishna, neither victory nor sovereignty, nor pleasures.

किं नो राज्येन गोविन्द किं भोगैर्जीवितेन वा येषामर्थे काक्षितं नो राज्यं भोगाः सुखानि च।
What is sovereignty, what is enjoyment, what is even.life to us, O Govinda when those, for whose sake we wish to have sovereignty, enjoyments and pleasures (in this world).

त इमेऽवस्थिता युद्धे प्राणांस्त्यक्त्वा धनानि च आचार्याः पितरः पुत्रास्तथैव च पितामहाः। मातुलाः श्वशुराः पौत्रा: स्याला: सम्बन्धिनस्तथा। एतान् न हन्तुमिच्छामि नतोऽपि मधुसूदन।
Are all present here in this battle, giving up all hopes of life and wealth! Preceptors, fathers, grand-fathers and sons, Maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-inlaw and relatives, I do not desire to kill them. O Madhusudana, even if they kill me.

अपि त्रैलोक्यराज्यस्य हेतोः किं नु महीकृते निहत्य धार्तराष्ट्रान् नः का प्रीतिः स्याज्जनार्दन।
Not even for the sake of the sovereignty over the three worlds, much less for that of this earth! What pleasure will be ours, O Janardana, by killing Dhritarashtra's sons!

पापमेवाश्रयेदस्मान् हत्वैतानाततायिनः तस्मानार्दा वयं हन्तुं धार्तराष्ट्रान् स्वबान्धवान्। स्वजनं हि कथं हत्वा सुखिनः स्याम माधव
Even killing these felons, we shall incur sin. Therefore, it is not proper that we shall kill our own kinsmen, these sons of Dhritarashtra. How can we, O Madhava, be happy by killing our own relatives?

यद्यप्येते न पश्यन्ति लोभोपहतचेतसः। कुलक्षयकृतं दोषं मित्रद्रोहे च पातकम्
If they, blinded by avarice, cannot see the sin they commit by exterminating the (Kuru) race, and playing enmity with friends.

कथं न ज्ञेयमस्माभिः पापादस्मानिवर्तितुम्। कुलक्षयकृतं दोषं प्रपश्यद्भिर्जनार्दन
Why should we not, O Janardana who know that sin is the result of exterminating the race, learn to desist from it?

कुलक्षये प्रणश्यन्ति कुलधर्माः सनातनाः। धर्मे नष्टे कुलं कृत्स्नमधर्मोऽभिभवत्युत
On the extinction of a family, the old and ever continuing family rites are destroyed), nobody being alive to solemnize them). When religious rites are thus destroyed, sin predominates over all.

अधर्माभिभवात् कृष्ण प्रदुष्यन्ति कुलस्त्रियः। स्त्रीषु दुष्टासु वार्ष्णेय जायते वर्णसंकरः
From the predominance of sin, O Krishna, women become corrupt, and then O descendant of Vrishni, cross-breeds (mixed-castes) are borm.

संकरो नरकायैव कुलमानां कुलस्य च। पतन्ति पितरो ह्येषां लुप्तपिण्डोदकक्रियाः
Such cross-breeding leads both the exterminator of the race and the race itself to hell. The (deceased) ancestors whose Sraddha ceremonies have ceased, (to whom children have stopped to give food and water), fall (from heaven to hell).

दोषैरेतैः कुलघ्नानां वर्णसंकरकारकैः। उत्साद्यन्ते जातिधर्माः कुलधर्माश्च शाश्वताः
Both the caste and family-rites of the exterminators of the race, (who are) guilty of the sin of cross-breeding, are destroyed.

उत्सन्नकुलधर्माणां मनुष्याणां जनार्दन। नरके नियतं वासो भवतीत्यनुशुश्रुम
We have heard, O Janardana, that those whose family-rites are thus destroyed, live for ever in hell.

अहो बत महत्पापं कर्तुं व्यवसिता वयम्। यद् राज्यसुखलोभेन हन्तुं स्वजनमुद्यताः
Alas, we are engaged in committing a great sin. We are to kill our own kinsmen for the greed of the pleasures of sovereignty.

यदि मामप्रतीकारमशस्त्रं शस्त्रपाणयः। धार्तराष्ट्रा रणे हन्युस्तन्मे क्षेमतरं भवेत्
Better would it be if unretaliating and unarmed myself, the armed sons of Dhritarashtra kill in battle".

संजय उवाच एवमुक्त्वार्जुनः संख्ये रथोपस्थ उपाविशत्। विसृज्य सशरं चापं शोकसंविग्नमानसः
Sanjaya said Having thus spoken on the field of battle, Arjuna, with a sorrowful heart, sat down on the car, casting aside his bow and arrows.

संजय उवाच तं तथा कृपयाविष्टमश्रुपूर्णाकुलेक्षणम्। विषीदन्तमिदं वाक्यमुवाच मधुसूदनः
Sanjaya said To him, whose heart was overcome with pity, whose eyes were full of tears, who was dejected and desponding the slayer of Madhu (Krishna) spoke thus.

श्रीभगवानुवाच कुतस्त्वा कश्मलमिदं विषमे समुपस्थितम्। अनार्यजुष्टमस्वय॑मकीर्तिकरमर्जुन
The great one said Whence, O Arjuna, has come upon you in this great crisis such delusion, a delusion unworthy of ihe Aryans, irreligious (undeserving of heaven) and breeder of infamy?

क्लैब्यं मा स्म गमः पार्थ नैतत् त्वय्युपपद्यते। क्षुद्रं हृदयदौर्बल्यं त्यक्त्वोत्तिष्ठ परंतप
Be not effeminate, Partha. It does not suit you. Arise, O terror of foes, shake off this mean weakness of heart.

अर्जुन उवाच कथं भीष्ममहं संख्ये द्रोणं च मधुसूदन। इषुभिः प्रतियोत्स्यामि पूजाह्नवरिसूदन
Arjuna said "O slayer of enemies, O slayer of Madhu, how shall I attack in this battle with arrows Bhishma and Drona, deserving of my worship?

गुरूनहत्वा हि महानुभावाच्छ्रेयो भोक्तुं भक्ष्यमपीह लोके। हत्वार्थकामांस्तु गुरूनिहैव भुञ्जीय भोगान् रुधिरप्रदिग्धान्
It is better for one to live on alms then to kill (such) preceptors of great glory. By killing preceptors, even if they are eager for worldly gains, it would be enjoying blood-stained pleasures.

न चैतद् विद्मः कतरत्नो गरीयो यद् वा जयेम यदि वा नो जयेयुः। यानेव हत्वा न जिजीविषाम स्तेऽवस्थिताः प्रमुखे धार्तराष्ट्राः
We do not know which of the two is better for us, to vanquish or to be vanquished? Even those, whom having killed we do not desire to live, those sons of Dhritarashtra, stand before us!

कार्पण्यदोषोपहतस्वभावः पृच्छामि त्वां धर्मसम्मूढचेताः। यच्छ्रेयः स्यान्निश्चितं ब्रूहि तन्मे शिष्यस्तेऽहं शाधि मां त्वां प्रपन्नम्
I am afraid of the sin of race extermination. I am confounded about my duty. I ask you, tell me what is assuredly good for me. I am your disciple, instruct me, I am at your disposal.

न हि प्रपश्यामि ममापनुद्याद् यच्छोकमुच्छोषणमिन्द्रियाणाम्। अवाप्य भूमावसपत्नमृद्धं राज्यं सुराणामपि चाधिपत्यम्
Even if I get the undisputed sovereignty over the most prosperous kingdom of the world, or that over the celestial, I do not see was that which can remove my grief most painful (killing) to my senses.

संजय उवाच एवमुक्त्वा हृषीकेशं गुडाकेशः परंतप। न योत्स्य इति गोविन्दमुक्त्वा तूष्णीं बभूव ह
Sanjaya said Having spoken thus to Hrishikesh, O terror of foes, Gudakesha said to Govinda, “I shall not fight", and remained silent.

तमुवाच हृषीकेशः प्रहसन्निव भारत। सेनयोरुभयोर्मध्ये विषीदन्तमिदं वचः
To him, who overcome with despondency in the midst of the two armies. Hrishikesha thus spoke smiling.

श्रीभगवानुवाच अशोच्यानन्वशोचस्त्वं प्रज्ञावादांश्च भाषसे। गतासूनगतातूंश्च नानुशोचन्ति पण्डिताः
The great one said "You grieve for those that deserve no grief; and (at the same time) you utter words of wisdom. (But) men of knowledge do not grieve for the living or for the dead.

न त्वेवाहं जातु नासं न त्वं नेमे जनाधिपाः। न चैव न भविष्यामः सर्वे वयमतः परम्
Neither I, nor you, nor these kings were ever non-existent; (and again) none of us will hereafter cease to exist.

देहिनोऽस्मिन् यथा देहे कौमारं यौवनं जरा। तथा देहान्तरप्राप्तिर्षीरस्तत्र न मुह्यति
As childhood, youth and old age are (changes) in the body of man, so death is but a change of this body to another. A man of knowledge is not deluded by it.

मात्रास्पर्शास्तु कौन्तेय शीतोष्णसुखदुःखदाः। आगमापायिनोऽनित्यास्तास्तितिक्षस्व भारत
The contacts of senses (with external objects). O son of Kunti, which produce cold, heat, pleasure and pain, are not permanent, having beginning and end. Therefore, O Bharata, bear them.

यं हि न व्यथयन्त्येते पुरुषं पुरुषर्षभ। समदुःखसुखं धीरं सोऽमृतत्वाय कल्पते।
The man, who is learned in true knowledge, whom they (contact of senses) afflict not, and to whom pain and pleasure are alike, merits Moksha (final emancipation).

नासतो विद्यते भावो नाभावो विद्यते सतः। उभयोरपि दृष्टोऽन्तस्त्वनयोस्तत्त्वदर्शिभिः
There is no existence of that which is Asat (unreal), and there is non non-existence of that which is Sat (real). The truly learned men perceive the correct conclusion of the both.

अविनाशि तु तद् विद्धि येन सर्वमिदं ततम्। विनाशमव्ययस्यास्य न कश्चित् कर्तुमर्हति
Know, that which pervades all this (universe) is indestructible. None can destroy that imperishable (principle).

अन्तवन्त इमे देहा नित्यस्योक्ताः शरीरिणः। अनाशिनोऽप्रमेयस्य तस्माद् युध्यस्व भारत
The (imaterial) body (only) of the everlasting, indestructible, infinite and embodied. Self is said to be perishable. Therefore, O Bharata, engage in battle.

य एनं वेत्ति हन्तारं यश्चैनं मन्यते हतम्। उभौ तौ न विजानीतो नायं हन्ति न हन्यते
He, who thinks that It (the great Self in many) is the killer and he who thinks that It is killed, both know nothing. It neither kills, nor is killed.

नायं भूत्वा वा न भूयः। अजो नित्यः शाश्वतोऽयं पुराणो न हन्यते हन्यमाने शरीरे
It is never born, It never dies, having existed. It does not exist no more. Unborn, everlasting, unchangeable, ancient, It is not killed, Its body being killed.

वेदाविनाशिनं नित्यं य एनमजमव्ययम्। कथं स पुरुषः पार्थ कं घातयति हन्ति कम्
How and whom can that man, O Partha, who knows It (self) to be unborn indestructible, everlasting and imperishable, kill or cause to be killed?

वासांसि जीर्णानि यथा विहाय नवानि गृह्णाति नरोऽपराणि। न्यन्यानि संयाति नवानि देही
As a man, casting off worn-out clothes, put on other new ones, so embodied. Self, casting off old bodies, enter into other new ones.

नैनं छिन्दन्ति शस्त्राणि नैनं दहति पावकः। न चैनं क्लेदयन्त्यापो न शोषयति मारुतः
Weapon does not cut it; fire does no: burn It; water does not moist It, and wind does not dry It.

अच्छेद्योऽयमदाह्योऽयमक्लेद्योऽशोष्य एव च। नित्यः सर्वगतः स्थाणुरचलोऽयं सनातनः
It is said that It is not to be cut, not to be burnt, not to be moistened and not to be dried up. It is everlasting, all pervading stable, firm, eternal, ever continuing not perceivable, inconceivable and unchangeable.

अव्यक्तोऽयमचिन्त्योऽयमविकार्योऽयमुच्यते। तस्मादेवं विदित्वैनं नानुशोचितुमर्हसि
Therefore knowing It (the great Soul in man) to be such, you ought not to grieve.

अथ चैनं नित्यजातं नित्यं वा मन्यसे मृतम्। तथाऽपि त्वं महाबाहो नैवं शोचितुमर्हसि
(And again) if you think, O mighty armed, that It (self) constantly take birth and constantly dies, even then you ought not thus to grieve.

जातस्य हि ध्रुवो मृत्युर्बुवं जन्म मृतस्य च। तस्मादपरिहार्येऽर्थे न त्वं शोचितुमर्हसि
For, death is certain to one who is born; and birth is certain to one who is dead. Therefore, for such unavoidable things, you ought not to grieve.

अव्यक्तादीनि भूतानि व्यक्तमध्यानि भारत। अव्यक्तनिधनान्येव तत्र का परिदेवना
In the beginning, O Bharata, all beings are unmanifested, in the middle they are manifest, and after destruction, they are unmanifested again. What lamentation could there be then for it?

माश्चर्यवद् वदति तथैव चान्यः। आश्चर्यवच्चैनमन्यः शृणोति श्रुत्वाऽप्येनं वेद न चैव कश्चित्
One sees it as a wonder, another speaks of it as a wonder; other again hear of it as a wonder; but even hearing of it, no one understand it.

देही नित्यमवध्योऽयं देहे सर्वस्य भारत। तस्मात् सर्वाणि भूतानि न त्वं शोचितुमर्हसि
This indestructible embodied self, O Bharata, is in the bodies of every one; therefore, you ought not to grieve for (the death of) all beings.

स्वधर्मपि चावेक्ष्य न विकम्पितुमर्हसि। धाद्धि युद्धाच्छ्रेयोऽन्यत् क्षत्रियस्य न विद्यते
(And again) loO king to your own duty pertaining to your caste, you ought not to waver; for there is nothing better for a Kshatriya than a righteous battle.

यदृच्छया चोपपन्नं स्वर्गद्वापरमपावृतम्। सुखिनः क्षत्रियाः पार्थ लभन्ते युद्धमीदृशम्
Happy are those Kshatriya who obtain such battle to fight, a battle coming of itself and being the open gate to heaven.

अथ चेत् त्वमिमं धर्म्य संग्रामं न करिष्यसि। ततः स्वधर्मं कीर्ति च हित्वा पापमवाप्स्यसि
If you will not fight this righteous battle, you will incur sin for abandoning your own duty and fame;

अकीर्ति चापि भूतानि कथयिष्यन्ति तेऽव्ययाम्। सम्भावितस्य चाकीर्तिमरणादतिरिच्यते
And all men will proclaim your everlasting infamy. To him, who is honoured, infamy is a greater (calamity) then death.

भयाद् रणादुपरतं मंस्यन्ते त्वां महारथाः। येषां च त्वं बहुमतो भूत्वा यास्यसि लाघवम्
And all great car warriors will think that you abstain from the battle through fear. You will be lightly thought of by those who honoured you before.

अवाच्यवादांश्चं बहून् वदिष्यन्ति तवाहिताः। निन्दन्तस्तव सामर्थ्य ततो दुःखतरं नु किम्
Decrying your power, your enemies will say things unutterable. What can be more painful than this!

हतो वा प्राप्स्यसि स्वर्ग जित्वा वा भोक्ष्यसे महीम्। तस्मादुत्तिष्ठ कौन्तेय युद्धाय कृतनिश्चयः
If killed, you will attain to heaven; and if victorious, you will enjoy the whole world. Therefore, being resolved to fight, arise, O son of Kunti.

सुखदुःखे समे कृत्वा लाभालाभौ जयाजयौ। ततो युद्धाय युज्यस्व नैव पापमवाप्स्यसि
Considering pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory and defeat, all the same, be ready for fight, and then, you will incur no sin.

एषा तेऽभिहिता सांख्ये बुद्धिोगे त्विमां शृणु। बुद्ध्या युक्तो यया पार्थ कर्मबन्धं प्रहास्यसि
The knowledge now imparted to you is relating to Sankha (the mystery of knowing Self). Now listen to Yoga, (the mystery of living in Self, which, if well possessed, O Partha, cuts off Karmabandhana (the law of rebirths, resulting from the effects of actions).

नेहाभिक्रमनाशोऽस्ति प्रत्यवायो न विद्यते। स्वल्पमण्यस्य धर्मस्य त्रायते महतो भयात्
In this (Yoga) even the first attempt is not fruitless; there are no obstacles in it. Even a little of this delivers one from the great danger (of worldly births).

व्यवसायात्मिका बुद्धिरेकेह कुरुनन्दन। बहुशाखा हनन्ताश्च बुद्धयोऽव्यवसायिनाम्
In this, O son of Kuru, there is mind's but one state, consisting of firm devotion; whereas undevotional men's minds are many-branched and attached to endless pursuits.

यामिमां पुष्पितां वाचं प्रवदन्त्यविपश्चितः। वेदवादरताः पार्थ नान्यदस्तीति वादिनः कामात्मानः स्वर्गपरा जन्मकर्मफलप्रदाम्। क्रियाविशेषबहुला भोगैश्वर्यगति प्रति
Those that are not learned those that delight in the Vedas, those that say that there is nothing else, those that are found of worldly pleasures, those that regard heaven as the highest object for acquisition, say flowery words on the birth resulting from the fruits of actions, and on multifarious rites that promise to give wealth and enjoyments.

भोगैश्वर्यप्रसक्तानां तयाऽपहतचेतसाम्। व्यवसायात्मिका बुद्धिः समाधौ न विधीयते
Devotional feelings never arise in those whose minds have been stolen by the words of the lovers of enjoyment and wealth.

त्रैगुण्यविषया वेदा निस्त्रैगुण्यो भवार्जुन। निर्द्वन्द्वो नित्यसत्त्वस्थो निर्योगक्षेम आत्मवान्
The Vedas, O Arjuna, relate of the three qualities. Be free from them, by being unaffected by the pairs of opposites i.e., (heat and cold; pain and pleasures); by preserving courage; by being free from anxiety for new acquisitions; or from anxiety for the protection of old ones; and by being self-possessed.

यावानर्थ उदपाने सर्वतः सम्प्लुतोदके। तावान् सर्वेषु वेदेषु ब्राह्मणस्य विजानतः
The (water of the) small tank serves the same purposes as (that of) the great lake. Like the above, the Brahmana, learned in devotion, serves the same purposes as those of all the Vedas.

कर्मण्येवाधिकारस्ते मा फलेषु कदाचन। मा कर्मफलहेतुर्भूर्मा ते सङ्गोऽस्त्वकर्मणि
Your concern is only with actions, never with their fruits. Let not the fruits of actions be your motive. (at the same time) let not your inclination be towards action.

योगस्थः कुरु कर्माणि सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा धनंजय। सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योः समो भूत्वा समत्वं योग उच्यते
Casting off all attachments, considering success and non-success the same, O Dhananjaya, perform actions. Such equanimity is called Yoga.

दूरेण ह्यवरं कर्म बुद्धियोगाद् धनंजय। बुद्धौ शरणमन्विच्छ कृपणाः फलहेतवः
Religious rites, O Dhananjaya, is far inferior to devotion; therefore take shelter in devotion. The men who look to the fruits of their actions are pitiable.

बुद्धियुक्तो जहातीह उभे सुकृतदुष्कृते। तस्माद् योगाय युज्यस्व योगः कर्मसु कौशलम्
Devotional men do not see the difference between good and bad works in this world. Therefore apply yourself to devotion. Cleverness in action is devotion.

कर्मजं बुद्धियुक्ता हि फलं त्यक्त्वा मनीषिणः। जन्मबन्धविनिर्मुक्ताः पदं गच्छन्त्यनामयम्
The wise, possessed of devotion, giving up the fruits of action and being freed from shackles of births, repair to the place where there is no unhappiness.

यदा ते मोहकलिलं बुद्धिर्व्यतितरिष्यति। तदा गन्ताऽसि निर्वेदं श्रोतव्यस्य श्रुतस्य च
When your understanding (mind) has gone beyond all delusion, then will you attain to the indifference to all that you have heard or will hear.

श्रुतिविप्रतिपन्ना ते यदा स्थास्यति निश्चला। समाधावचला बुद्धिस्तदा योगमवाप्स्यसि
When your mind, confounded by (all) that you have heard, will stand firm in contemplation, then will you acquire devotion.

अर्जुन उवाच स्थितप्रज्ञस्य का भाषा समाधिस्थस्य केशव। स्थितधीः किं प्रभाषेत किमासीत व्रजेत किम्
Arjuna said "What are the characteristics, O Keshava, of one whose mind is steady, and whose understanding is devotional? How does the man of steady-mind speak, how does he sit, how does he move?"

श्रीभगवानुवाच प्रजहाति यदा कामान् सर्वान् पार्थ मनोगतान्। आत्मन्येवात्मना तुष्टः स्थितप्रज्ञस्तदोच्यते
The Great One said “When a man, O Partha, abandons all his mental desires, and becomes pleased in his self by his own self, is called one of Steady-mind.

दुःखेष्वनुद्विग्नमनाः सुखेषु विगतस्पृहः। वीतरागभयक्रोधः स्थितधीर्मुनिरुच्यते
Who is not moved in misery, who has no cravings for pleasures, and who is freed from attachment, anger and fear, is called the Sage of Steady-Mind.

यः सर्वत्रानभिस्नेहस्तत् तत् प्राप्य शुभाशुभम्। नाभिनन्दति न द्वेष्टि तस्य प्रज्ञा प्रतिष्ठिता
His mind is steady who has no attachment for any thing; and who neither feels exultation nor aversion on receiving either the good or the bad.

यदा संहरते चायं कूर्मोऽङ्गानीव सर्वशः। इन्द्रियाणीन्द्रियार्थेभ्यस्तस्य प्रज्ञा प्रतिष्ठिता
His mind is steady who withdraws all his senses from all the (worldly) objects of senses, as a tortoise withdraws his limbs.

विषया विनिवर्तन्ते निराहारस्य देहिनः। रसवर्ज रसोऽप्यस्य परं दृष्ट्वा निवर्तते
The objects of senses draw from an abstinent person, but not so his passions. But the passions fly from him who has seen the Supreme.

यततो ह्यपि कौन्तेय पुरुषस्य विपश्चितः। इन्द्रियाणि प्रमाथीनि हरन्ति प्रसभं मनः
The madly boisterous senses, O son of Kunti, steal by force the mind of even that wise man who is striving (for emancipation).

तानि सर्वाणि संयम्य युक्त आसीत मत्परः। वशे हि यस्येन्द्रियाणि तस्य प्रज्ञा प्रतिष्ठिता
The man of Yoga solely depends upon Me, keeping all his senses under control. His mind is steady who has controlled his senses.

ध्यायतो विषयान् पुंसः सङ्गस्तेषूपजायते। सङ्गात् संजायते कामः कामात् क्रोधोऽभिजायते
Pondering over worldly matters breeds attachment for them; from this attachment desire is produce; from desire anger is begot.

क्रोधाद् भवति सम्मोहः सम्मोहात् स्मृतिविभ्रमः। स्मृतिभ्रंशाद् बुद्धिनाशो बुद्धिनाशात् प्रणश्यति
From anger is produced the want of indiscrimination; from want of indiscrimination, confusion of memory, from the confusion of memory, loss of reason, and from loss of reason, final destruction (ruin).

रागद्वेषवियुक्तैस्तु विषयानिन्द्रियैश्चरन्। आत्मवश्यैविधेयात्मा प्रसादमधिगच्छति
The self-controlled man, who moves among the objects of senses, having his serses under his control, and being free from affection or aversion, attains to peace.

प्रसादे सर्वदुःखानां हानिरस्योपजायते। प्रसन्नचेतसो ह्याशु बुद्धिः पर्यवतिष्ठते
Peace being attained, all his miseries are destroyed. He, whose mind has attained to peace, soon becomes steady.

नास्ति बुद्धिरयुक्तस्य न चायुक्तस्य भावना। न चाभावयतः शान्तिरशान्तस्य कुतः सुखम्
Undevotional man has no understanding, he has no contemplation, he has no peace. And where is happiness for him who has no peace?

इन्द्रियाणां हि चरतां यन्मनोऽनु विधीयते। तदस्य हरति प्रज्ञां वायु वमिवाम्भसि
The understanding of that man is destroyed whose mind follows the roving senses, as the wind destroys a boat in a sea.

तस्माद् यस्य महाबाहो निगृहीतानि सर्वशः। इन्द्रियाणीन्द्रियार्थेभ्यस्तस्य प्रज्ञा प्रतिष्ठिता
Therefore, O mighty armed, his mind is steady whose senses are brought under control from all objects of senses.

या निशा सर्वभूतानां तस्यां जागर्ति संयमी। यस्यां जाग्रति भूतानि सा निशा पश्यतो मुनेः
When it is night for all beings, the selfcontrolled man is wide awake, when all men are awake, then such sages would be night.

आपूर्यमाणमचलप्रतिष्ठं समुद्रमापः प्रविशन्ति यद्वत्। तद्वत् कामा यं प्रविशन्ति सर्वे स शान्तिमाप्नोति न कामकामी
He, in whom all objects of senses enter, like the ocean in which various waters enter, but do not make any increase or decrease, attains to peace, but not he who desire to have objects of senses.

विहाय कामान् यः सर्वान् पुमांश्चरति निःस्पृहः। निर्ममो निरहंकारः स शान्तिमधिगच्छति
The man, who moves about casting of all desires, and being freed from attachments, carvings for things, and egoism (pride), attains to peace.

एषा ब्राह्मी स्थितिः पार्थ नैनां प्राप्य विमुह्यति। स्थित्वास्यामन्तकालेऽपि ब्रह्मनिर्वाणमृच्छति
This is, O Partha, living in Self (God). After attaining it, no delusion exists; and remaining in this state at the time of one's death, one attains to Brahma Nirvana.

अर्जुन उवाच ज्यायसी चेत् कर्मणस्ते मता बुद्धिर्जनार्दन। तत् किं कर्मणि घोरे मां नियोजयसि केशव
Arjuna said If knowledge, O Janardana, O Keshava, is considered by you superior to action why then do you prompt me to this fearful action?

व्यामिश्रेणेव वाक्येन बुद्धिं मोहयसीव मे। तेदकं वद निश्चित्य येन श्रेयोऽहमाप्नुयाम्
You confound my mind by equivocal words, (praising action once and praising knowledge next). Tell me definitely what is good for me".

श्रीभगवानुवाच लोकेऽस्मिन् द्विविधा निष्ठा पुरा प्रोक्ता मयाऽनघ। ज्ञानयोगेन सांख्यानां कर्मयोगेन योगिनाम्
The great one said I have told you, O sinless one, there are two paths in this world, that of the Sankhyas by Jnana-yoga (knowledge) and that of yogis by Karma-yoga (action).

न कर्मणामनारम्भान्नैष्कर्म्यं पुरुषोऽस्तुते। न च संन्यसनादेव सिद्धिं समधिगच्छति
Man does not attain freedom from action by not performing action. By asceticism also, he does not attain to final emancipation.

न हि कश्चित् क्षणमपि जातु तिष्ठत्यकर्मकृत्। कार्यते ह्यवशः कर्म सर्वः प्रकृतिजैर्गुणैः
None ever remains for a moment without performing some action. All perform actions impelled by the qualities (laws) of Nature.

कर्मेन्द्रियाणि संयम्य य आस्ते मनसा स्मरन्। इन्द्रियार्थान् विमूढात्मा मिथ्याचारः स उच्यते
The deluded man, who, controlling his organs of actions, ponders in his mind over the objects of senses, is a hypocrite.

यस्त्विन्द्रियाणि मनसा नियम्यारभतेऽर्जुन। कर्मेन्द्रियैः कर्मयोगमसक्तः स विशिष्यते
But he, who restraining his senses by his mind, performs Karma-yoga by the organs of actions, is superior (to all).

नियतं कुरु कर्म त्वं कर्म ज्यायो ह्यकर्मणः। शरीरयात्रापि च ते न प्रसिद्ध्येदकर्मणः
Therefore, always perform action, for action is better than inaction; and your body cannot be supported (kept alive) without performing action.

यज्ञार्थात् कर्मणोऽन्यत्र लोकोऽयं कर्मबन्धनः। तदर्थं कर्म कौन्तेय मुक्तसङ्गः समाचर
The world is bound in (by the laws) of action, except the action of Sacrifice. Therefore, O son of Kunti, being free from attachment, perform actions.

सहयज्ञाः प्रजाः सृष्ट्वा पुरोवाच प्रजापतिः। अनेन प्रसविष्यध्वमेष वोऽस्त्विष्टकामधुक्
In olden times, Creator, having created men with Sacrifice, said; “Multiply by this. May it be the giver of all that you desire.

देवान् भावयतानेन ते देवा भावयन्तु वः। परस्परं भावयन्तः श्रेयः परमवाप्स्यथ
Please the celestial by this (Sacrifice); may the celestial please you. Thus pleasing each other you will attain to the highest good".

इष्टान् भोगान् हि वो देवा दास्यन्ते यज्ञभाविताः। तैर्दत्तानप्रदायैभ्यो यो भुङ्क्ते स्तेन एव सः
Being pleased by the Sacrifice, the celestial will give you your desired enjoyments. Therefore, he who enjoys himself without giving to the givers (celestial) is a thief.

यज्ञशिष्टाशिनः सन्तो मुच्यन्ते सर्वकिल्बिषैः। भुञ्जते ते त्वघं पापा ये पचन्त्यात्मकारणात्
The good men, who eat the leavings of the Sacrifice, are freed from all sins, but the bad men, who cook food for themselves, incur sin.

अन्नाद् भवन्ति भूतानि पर्जन्यादन्नसम्भवः। यज्ञाद् भवति पर्जन्यो यज्ञः कर्मसमुद्भवः
Creatures are the out-come of food. Food is produced by rain. The rain is produced by Sacrifice. The Sacrifice is produced by action.

कर्म ब्रह्मोद्भवं विद्धि ब्रह्माक्षरसमुद्भवम्। तस्मात् सर्वगतं ब्रह्म नित्यं यज्ञे प्रतिष्ठितम्
Action is produced from Brahma; Brahma is produced from the Imperishable. Therefore, all-pervading Brahma is always in the Sacrifice.

एवं प्रवर्तितं चक्रं नानुवर्तयतीह यः। अघायुरिन्द्रियारामो मोघं पार्थ स जीवति
The sensual sinful man, who does not conform. O Partha, to this Revolving Wheel, lives in vain.

यस्त्वात्मरतिरेव स्यादात्मतृप्तश्च मानवः। आत्मन्येव च संतुष्टस्तस्य कार्यं न विद्यते
But the man, who is attached to his own Self, who is pleased with his own Self, and who is contented with his own Self, has no actions to perform.

नैव तस्य कृतेनार्थो नाकृतेनेह कश्चन। न चास्य सर्वभूतेषु कश्चिदर्थव्यपाश्रयः
He has no concern in actions done or not done in this world. Not has he any dependence on any being.

तस्मादसक्तः सततं कार्यं कर्म समाचर। असक्तो ह्याचरन् कर्म परमाप्नोति पुरुषः
Therefore, being freed from all attachments, perform actions. For, the man who performs actions without attachment, attain to the Supreme.

कर्मणैव हि संसिद्धिमास्थिता जनकादयः। लोकसंग्रहमेवापि सम्पश्यन् कर्तुमर्हसि
By performing actions alone, Janaka and others attained to final emancipation (Siddhi). (And again) having regard to keeping the people to their rites, you ought to perform actions.

यद् यदाचरति श्रेष्ठस्तत् तदेवेतरो जनः। स यत् प्रमाणं कुरुते लोकस्तदनुवर्तते
Whatever a great man does, so do the mass. What great men consider authorities, the mass follow.

न मे पार्थास्ति कर्तव्यं त्रिषु लोकेषु किंचन। नानवाप्तमवाप्तव्यं वर्त एव च कर्मणि
There is, O Partha, nothing to do for Me in the three worlds. I have nothing to acquire which has not been (already) acquired; still I do perform actions.

यदि ह्यहं न वर्तेयं जातु कर्मण्यतन्द्रितः। मम वानुवर्तन्ते मनुष्याः पार्थ सर्वशः
If, O Partha, out of idleness I do not engage in actions, all men would follow my example.

उत्सीदेयुरिमे लोका न कुर्यां कर्म चेदहम्। संकरस्य च कर्ता स्यामुपहन्यामिमाः प्रजाः
If I do not perform actions, all the worlds breeding, and I should be the ruining of the people.

सक्ताः कर्मण्यविद्वांसो यथा कुर्वन्ति भारत। कुर्याद् विद्वांस्तथासऽक्तश्चिकीर्षुर्लोकसंग्रहम्
Ignorant men act with attachment to actions, but the learned act without attachment to actions. Desiring to stick men to their duties.

न बुद्धिभेदं जनयेदज्ञानां कर्मसङ्गिनाम्। जोषयेत् सर्वकर्माणि विद्वान् युक्तः समाचरन्।
a wise man should not confuse the mind of the ignorant who are attached to actions. He should make them take to actions, by himself acting without attachments.

प्रकृतेः क्रियमाणानि गुणैः कर्माणि सर्वशः। अहंकारविमूढात्मा कर्ताऽहमिति मन्यते
Every thing is every way is done by the qualities (laws) of Nature (alone). He whose mind is deluded by egoism considers himself the doer of actions.

तत्त्ववित् तु महाबाहो गुणकर्मविभागयोः। गुणा गुणेषु वर्तन्त इति मत्वा न सज्जते
But, O mighty-armed, the wise men who know the difference (of Self) from qualities (laws of Nature) and from actions, feels no egoism, knowing that qualities deal with qualities.

प्रकृतेर्गुणसम्मूढाः सज्जन्ते गुणकर्मसु। तानकृतस्नविदो मन्दान् कृत्स्नविन्न विचालयेत्
The man of perfect knowledge should not shake the belief of the men of imperfect knowledge, who being deluded by the qualities of Nature, from attachments to the actions done by the qualities (laws) of Nature.

मयि सर्वाणि कर्माणि संन्यस्याध्यात्मचेतसा। निराशीर्निर्ममो भूत्वा युध्यस्व विगतज्वरः
Therefore, dedicating all actions to Me, and knowing the Mystery of Self, engage in battle without desires, without any feelings (for any body) and without any mental trouble.

ये मे मतमिदं नित्यमनुतिष्ठन्ति मानवाः। श्रद्धावन्तोऽनसूयन्तो मुच्यन्ते तेऽपि कर्मभिः
Those men who without cavil always follow my this opinion, being full of faith, are released from Karmabandhanam.

ये त्वेतदभ्यसूयन्तो नानुतिष्ठन्ति मे मतम्। सर्वज्ञानविमूढांस्तान् विद्धि नष्टानचेतसः
Know, those men, that carp at my opinion and do not follow it, are devoid of conscience and bereft of all knowledge and ruined.

सदृशं चेष्टते स्वस्याः प्रकृतेर्ज्ञानवानपि। प्रकृति यान्ति भूतानि निग्रहः किं करिष्यति
Even a man of knowledge acts according to his own nature. All beings follow Nature. What then restraints (of the organs of action) will avail?

इन्द्रियस्येन्द्रियस्यार्थे रागद्वेषौ व्यवस्थितौ। तयोर्न वशमागच्छेत् तौ ह्यस्य परिपन्थिनौ
All senses have each their likes and dislikes for respective fixed objects. But no one should be under their control, for they are one's (great) opponents, (hindrances to final emancipation).

श्रेयान् स्वधर्मो विगुणः परधर्मात् स्वनुष्ठितात्। स्वधर्मे निधनं श्रेयः परधर्मो भयावहः
One's own Dharma, even if imperfectly performed is superior to the perfectly performed Dharma of others. Death is preferable in performing one's own Dharma for the Dharma of others is dangerous".

अर्जुन उवाच अथ केन प्रयुक्तोऽयं पापं चरति पूरुषः। अनिच्छन्नपि वार्ष्णेय बलादिव नियोजितः
Arjuna said Then, O descendant of Vrishni, by whom impelled does man commit sin, though unwilling, as if driven by (some mysterious) force?

श्रीभगवानुवाच काम एष क्रोध एष रजोगुणसमुद्भवः। महाशनो महापाप्मा विद्धयेनमिह वैरिणम्
The great One said It is desire, it is wrath, born of the qualities of Passion (Raja Guna). It is greatly ravenous; it is greatly sinful. Know this to be the great enemy in this world(for final emancipation).

धूमेनाव्रियते वह्निर्यथादर्शो मलेन च। यथोल्बेनावृतो गर्भस्तथा तेनेदमावृतम्
As fire is enveloped by smoke, a mirror by dust, the foetus by the womb, so this (true knowledge) is enveloped by Desire.

आवृतं ज्ञानमेतेन ज्ञानिनो नित्यवैरिणा। कामरूपेण कौन्तेय दुष्पूरेणानलेन च
O son of Kunti, the knowledge is always enveloped by this constant enemy of the man of knowledge. Desire, is like an insatiable fire.

इन्द्रियाणि मनो बुद्धिरस्याधिष्ठानमुच्यते। एतैर्विमोहयत्येष ज्ञानमावृत्य देहिनम्
It is said that its seat is in the senses, in the mind and in the understanding. By their help it deludes man, enveloping his knowledge.

तस्मात् त्वमिन्द्रियाण्यादौ नियम्य भरतर्षभ। पाप्मानं प्रजहि ह्येनं ज्ञानविज्ञाननाशनम्
Therefore, O best of the Bharata race, brining your senses under control, cast off this sinful thing which destroys both knowledge and Science (experience).

इन्द्रियाणि पराण्याहुरिन्द्रियेभ्यः परं मनः। मनसस्तु परा बुद्धिर्यो बुद्धेः परतस्तु सः
It is said, great are the senses (over material body); greater than the senses is the mind; greater than the mind is the understanding. That which is greater then the understanding is the (Self).

एवं बुद्धेः परं बुद्ध्वा संस्तभ्यात्मानमात्मना। जहि शत्रु महाबाहो कामरूपं दुरासदम्
Thus, O mighty-armed, knowing that which is grater than understanding, (i.e., Self), restraining Self by Self, destroy this unconquerable enemy, Desire.

श्रीमभगवानुवाच इमं विवस्वते योगं प्रोक्तवानहमव्ययम्। विवस्वान्मनवे प्राह मनुरिक्ष्वाकवेऽब्रवीत्
The great One said I told this imperishable (system of) Yoga to Vivasvat declared it to Manu; Manu declared it to lkshvaku.

एवं परम्पराप्राप्तमिमं राजर्षयो विदुः। स कालेनेह महता योगो नष्टः परंतप
Coming down thus, from generation to generation, it became know to the royal sages. But, O terror of foes, this yoga was lost to the worlds by long lapse of time.

स एवायं मया तेऽद्य योगः प्रोक्तः पुरातनः। भक्तोऽसि मे सखा चेति रहस्यं ह्येतदुत्तमम्
You are my devotee and friend; I have, therefore, told you that old yoga to day, for it is a great Mystery.

अर्जुन उवाच अपरं भवतो जन्म परं जन्म विवस्वतः। कथमेतद् विजानीयां त्वमादौ प्रोक्तवानिति
Arjuna said Later is your birth; prior is the birth of Vivasvan. How then shall I know that you first told it?

श्रीभगवानुवाच बहूनि मे व्यतीतानि जन्मानि तव चार्जुन। तान्यहं वेद सर्वाणि न त्वं वेत्थ परंतप
The great one said Many births of yours and mine. O Arjuna, have taken place. I know them all, O terror of foes, but you know not.

अजोऽपि सन्नव्ययात्मा भूतानामीश्वरोऽपि सन्। प्रकृति स्वामधिष्ठाय सम्भवाम्यात्ममायया
Though I am unborn (having no birth); though I am imperishable, though I am master of the elements, yet out of my Maya (power of illusion) I take birth, resting on (material) Nature.

यदा यदा हि धर्मस्य ग्लानिर्भवति भारत। अभ्युत्थानमधर्मस्य तदाऽऽत्मानं सृजाम्यहम्
Wheresoever, O Bharata, virtue languishes and sin predominates, I create myself.

परित्राणाय साधूनां विनाशाय त दुष्कृताम्। धर्मसंस्थापनार्थाय सम्भवामि युगे युगे
I take birth, age after age, for the protection of the good and the destruction of the wicked, and for the establishment of piety (true religion).

जन्म कर्म च मे दिव्यमेवं यो वेत्ति तत्त्वतः। त्यक्त्वा देहं पुनर्जन्म मामेति सोऽर्जुन
He, who truly knows my these (willful) births and wonderful deeds, after casting off his body, is not born again. He comes to Me.

वीतरागभयक्रोधा मन्मया मामुपाश्रिताः। बहवो ज्ञानतपसा पूता मद्भावमागताः
Many holy sages, who are freed from attachment, fear and wrath, who are full of Me and who depend upon Me, have attained to my essence.

ये यथा मां प्रपद्यन्ते तांस्तथैव भजाम्यहम्। मम वानुवर्तन्ते मनुष्याः पार्थ सर्वशः
I bestow my favours (on all men) in the way in which they worship Me. All men, O Partha, follow in my path, in every way.

काङ्क्षन्तः कर्मणां सिद्धि यजन्त इह देवताः। क्षिप्रं हि मानुषे लोके सिद्धिर्भवति कर्मजा
Desiring success of actions, men worship the Celestial (such as Indra &c.), for in this world the success of action is soon attained.

चातुर्वर्यं मया सृष्टं गुणकर्मविभागशः। तस्य कर्तारमपि मां विद्ध्यकर्तारमव्ययम्
According to qualities and (fruits of) actions, I have created four castes. Though I am their Creator, yet know me as being not a creator and not perishable.

न मां कर्माणि लिम्पन्ति न मे कर्मफले स्पृहा। इति मां योऽभिजानाति कर्मभिर्न स बध्यते
Actions do not touch me. I have no attachment in the fruits of actions. He who knows me as such is not tied down by actions.

एवं ज्ञात्वा कृतं कर्म पूर्वैरपि मुमुक्षुभिः। कुरु कर्मैव तस्मात्त्वं पूर्वैः पूर्वतरं कृतम्
Knowing this, men of old, desirous of emancipation, performed actions. Therefore, you too perform action, as was done by men of old in olden times.

किं कर्म किमकर्मेति कवयोऽप्यत्र मोहिताः। तत् ते कर्म प्रवक्ष्यामि यज्ज्ञात्वा मोक्ष्यसेऽशुभात्
Even men of true knowledge is confused about what is action and what is inaction. I shall speak to you about that action, learning which you will be freed from the (worldly) evils.

कर्मणो ह्यपि बौद्धव्य बोद्धव्यं च विकर्मणः। अकर्मणश्च बोद्धव्यं गहना कर्मणो गतिः
One must know what is action, one must also know what is forbidden action, and one must again know what is inaction. The nature of action is abstruse.

कर्मण्यकर्म यः पश्येदकर्मणि च कर्म यः। स बुद्धिमान् मनुष्येषु स युक्तः कृत्स्नकर्मकृत्
He, who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is a wise man, a Yogi and a doer of all actions.

यस्य सर्वे समारम्भाः कामसंकल्पवर्जिताः। ज्ञानाग्निदग्धकर्माणं तमाहुः पण्डितं बुधाः
The learned men call him wise whose all actions are free from desire and will and whose actions are burnt down by the fire of knowledge.

त्यक्त्वा कर्मफलासङ्गं नित्यतृप्तो निराश्रयः। कर्मण्यभिप्रवृत्तोऽपि नैव किंचित् करोति सः
Getting rid of the attachment (desire) for the fruits of actions, being ever contented, and depending on none, although (such men) engages in action, they do nothing at all.

निराशर्यतचित्तात्मा त्यक्तसर्वपरिग्रहः। शारीरं केवलं कर्म कुर्वन् नाप्नोति किल्बिषम्
Being devoid of desires and having the mind and the senses under control casting off all concerns, he, who performs action for the preservation of the body, incurs no sin.

यदृच्छालाभसंतुष्टो द्वन्द्वातीतो विमत्सरः। समः सिद्धावसिद्धौ च कृत्वाऽपि न निबध्यते
Being contended with what is earned spontaneously, rising superior to the pairs of opposites, being free from all jealousy, (such a man), being equable in success or failures, is not fettered by actions, although he performs actions.

गतसङ्गस्य मुक्तस्य ज्ञानावस्थितचेतसः। यज्ञायाचरतः कर्म समग्रं प्रविलीयते
The acts of the man who is devoid of attachment, who is free from passions and whose mind is steady in knowledge, are all destroyed.

ब्रह्मार्पणं ब्रह्म हविर्ब्रह्माग्नौ ब्रह्मणा हुतम्। ब्रह्मैव तेन गन्तव्यं ब्रह्मकर्मसमाधिना।
Brahma is the vessel of libation, Brahma is the libation itself, Brahma is the fire, Brahma is the pourer of libation to him who thus meditates upon Brahma in all his actions, Brahma is the goal to which he proceeds.

दैवमेवापरे यज्ञ योगिनः पर्युपासते। ब्रह्माग्नावपरे यज्ञं यज्ञेनैवोपजुह्वति
Some yogis perform the Sacrifice to the Celestial; others (however) offer up (such) Sacrifices in the Sacrifice of Brahma-Fire.

श्रोत्रादीनीन्द्रियाण्यन्ये संयमाग्निषु जुह्वति। शब्दादीन् विषयानन्ये इन्द्रियाग्निषु जुह्वति
Others offer up in the fire of Self-restraint all his senses, such as the senses of hearing and others. Others again offer up the objects of sense, such as sound into the fire of senses.

सर्वाणीन्द्रियकर्माणि प्राणकर्माणि चापरे। आत्मसंयमयोगाग्नौ जुह्वति ज्ञानदीपिते
Others offer up all the actions of the senses, and those of the life-breaths, into the Yoga-fire of self-restraint, kindled by knowledge.

द्रव्ययज्ञास्तपोयज्ञा योगयज्ञास्तथापरे। स्वाध्यायज्ञानयज्ञाश्च यतयः संशितव्रताः
Some perform the sacrifice for gaining possessions, some the Sacrifice of penance; others again Sacrifice of concentration of mind; some perform the Sacrifice of Vedic study, some that of knowledge, others again the Sacrifice of asceticism of rigid vows.

अपाने जुह्वति प्राणं प्राणेऽपानं तथापरे। प्राणापानगती रुद्ध्वा प्राणायामपरायणाः
Some offer up the upward life-breaths to downward life-breaths, and the down-ward life breaths to upward life breaths. Stopping up the motions of both the upward and downward life breaths some devote themselves to the restraint of the life-breath itself. Others, who take limited food, offer the life-breath to life-breath.

अपरे नियताहाराः प्राणान्प्राणेषु जुह्वति। सर्वेऽप्येते यज्ञविदो यज्ञक्षपितकल्मषाः
All these men, learned in the (various) Sacrifices, having their sins destroyed by Sacrifice, and eating the remains of the Sacrifice, which is ambrosia, go to the eternal Brahma.

यज्ञशिष्टामृतभुजो यान्ति ब्रह्म सनातनम्। नायं लोकोऽस्त्ययज्ञस्य कुतोऽन्यः कुरुसत्तम
O best of Kurus, this world is not for those who do not perform any Sacrifice, what to speak of the future world.

एवं बहुविधा यज्ञा वितता ब्रह्मणो मुखे। कर्मजान् विद्धि तान् सर्वानेवं ज्ञात्वा विमोक्ष्यसे
Thus Sacrifices of various sorts are in the Vedas. Know them all as the results of actions; and knowing this, you will be freed (from the fetters of the world).

श्रेयान् द्रव्यमयाद् यज्ञाज्ज्ञानयज्ञः परंतप। सर्वं कर्माखिलं पार्थ ज्ञाने परिसमाप्यते
The sacrifice of knowledge, O terror of foes, is superior to the Sacrifice for gaining possession (in this world or in the future), for, O Parthas, all actions are wholly and fully comprehended by knowledge.

तद् विद्धि प्रणिपातेन परिप्रश्नेन सेवया। उपदेक्ष्यन्ति ते ज्ञानं ज्ञानिनस्तत्वदर्शिनः
Learn knowledge by reverently saluting the learned, by asking them questions, by doing service to them. The men of knowledge and the men that know the Truth, will teach you knowledge.

यज्ज्ञात्वा न पुनर्मोहमेवं यास्यसि पाण्डव। येन भूतान्यशेषेण द्रक्ष्यस्यात्मन्यथो मयि
Having learnt it, O son of Pandu, you will not again fall into delusion. And by means of it, you will see all beings first in yourself and them in Me.

अपि चेदसि पापेभ्य: सर्वेभ्यः पापकृत्तमः। सर्वं ज्ञानप्लवेनैव वृजिनं संतरिष्यसि।
If you be the greatest sinner amongst all sinful men, you will (still) cross over the ocean of your sin by means of the boat of knowledge.

यथैधांसि समिद्धोऽग्निर्भस्मसात्कुरुतेऽर्जुन। ज्ञानाग्निः सर्वकर्माणि भस्मसात्कुरुते तथा
As, O Arjuna, a blazing fire reduces all wood to ashes, so the fire of knowledge reduces all actions to ashes.

न हि ज्ञानेन सदृशं पवित्रमिह विद्यते। तत् स्वयं योगसंसिद्धः कालेनात्मनि विन्दति
There is nothing in this world which so much purifies (man) as knowledge. The man, perfected by Yoga, learns it within himself in time.

श्रद्धावाँल्लभते ज्ञानं तत्परः संयतेन्द्रियः। ज्ञानं लब्वा परां शान्तिमचिरेणाधिगच्छति
The man of faith, the man of assiduousness, the man of self-restraint, obtains knowledge; and obtaining knowledge, he gains the highest tranquility (Mukti) without delay.

अज्ञश्चाश्रद्धधानश्च संशयात्मा विनश्यति। नायं लोकोऽस्ति न परो न सुखं संशयात्मनः
He, who is ignorant, who has no faith and whose mind is full of misgivings and doubt, is lost. Not this world, not the next, not (any) happiness is for him whose mind is full of doubts.

योगसंन्यस्तकर्माणं ज्ञानसंछिन्नसंशयम्। आत्मवन्तं न कर्माणि निबध्नन्ति धनंजय
Actions, O Dhananjaya, do not fetter him, who is self-possessed, whose doubts have been removed by knowledge and who has placed all his actions in Yoga.

तस्मादज्ञानसम्भूतं हृत्स्थं ज्ञानासिनाऽऽत्मनः। छित्त्वैनं संशयं योगमातिष्ठोत्तिष्ठ भारत
Therefore, Oh descendant of Bharata, destroying with the sword of knowledge these inisgivings of yours produced from ignorance, engage in yoga of action, Arise.

अर्जुन उवाच संन्यासं कर्मणां कृष्ण पुनर्योगं च शंससि। यच्छ्रेय एतयोरेकं तन्मे ब्रूहि सुनिश्चितम्
Arjuna said O Krishna, you praise Karma Sannyasa (renunciation of action) and also Karma yoga (the pursuit of action). Tell me definitely, which of the two is superior?

श्रीभगवानुवाच संन्यासः कर्मयोगश्च निःश्रेयसकरावुभौ। तयोस्तु कर्मसंन्यासात् कर्मयोगो विशिष्यते
The great One said Both renunciation of action and pursuit of action are means for emancipation. But of these two, pursuit of action is superior to renunciation of action.

ज्ञेयः स नित्यसंन्यासी यो न द्वेष्टि न काक्षति। निर्द्वन्द्वो हि महाबाहो सुखं बन्धात् प्रमुच्यते
He, who has no aversion and no desire, should for all times be considered an ascetic. For, O mighty-armed, he, who is free from the pairs of opposites, is easily released from the letters of the world.

सांख्ययोगौ पृथग्बालाः प्रवदन्ति न पण्डिताः। एकमण्यास्थितः सम्यगुभयोविन्दते फलम्
Fools, not wise men, say that Sankhya (renunciation of action to know God) and Yoga (pursuit of action living in God) are distinct. He who practices one, fully earns the fruits of the both.

यत् सांख्यैः प्राप्यते स्थानं तद् योगैरपि गम्यते। एकं सांख्यं च योगं च यः पश्यति स पश्यति
The place which the follower of Sankhya obtains; is also gained by the followers of Yoga. He sees truly who sees the Sankhya and the Yoga as one and the same.

संन्यासस्तु महाबाहो दुःखमाप्तुमयोगतः। योगयुक्तो मुनिर्ब्रह्म नचिरेणाधिगच्छति
O mighty-armed, asceticism is difficult to be attained without the Yoga of action. The sage, possessed of Yoga of action attains to Brahma without delay.

योगयुक्तो विशुद्धात्मा विजितात्मा जितेन्द्रियः। सर्वभूतात्मभूतात्मा कुर्वन्नपि न लिप्यते
He, who is possessed of Yoga, whose mind is pure, who is self-restrained, who has controlled his senses and who sees his self in every being, is not fettered by performing actions.

नैव किंचित् करोमीति युक्तो मन्येत तत्त्ववित्। पश्यशृण्वन् स्पृशञ्जिघ्रनश्नन् गच्छन् स्वपञ्श्वसन् प्रलपन् विसृजन् गृह्णनुन्मिषन्निमिषन्नपि। इन्द्रियाणीन्द्रियार्थेषु वर्तन्त इति धारयन्
The man of knowledge, the man of Yoga, thinks, I am doing nothing. When he sees, hears, touches, smells, eats, moves, sleeps, breathes, talks, throws out exertions, takes, opens and closes his eye-lids, he thinks that his senses (merely) deal with the objects of senses.

ब्रह्मण्याधाय कर्माणि सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा करोति यः। लिप्यते न स पापेन पद्मपत्रमिवाम्भसा
He, who performs actions, dedicating them to Brahma and casting off all attachments for their fruits, is not touched by sin, as the lotusleaf is never wet with water.

कायेन मनसा वुद्ध्या केवलैरिन्द्रियैरपि। योगिनः कर्म कुर्वन्ति सङ्गं त्यक्त्वाऽऽत्मशुद्धये
The yoga perform actions, attaining purity of self, the body, the mind, the understanding, even the senses, being free from all attachments.

युक्तः कर्मफलं त्यक्त्वा शान्तिमाप्नोति नैष्ठिकीम्। अयुक्तः कामकारेण फले सक्ता निबध्यते
The Yoga's, abandoning the desire for the fruits of actions, attains to to the highest tranquility, and the Non-yogi, being attached to the fruits of action, is tied down (to re-births) on account of desire.

सर्वकर्माणि मनसा संन्यस्यास्ते सुखं वशी। नवद्वारे पुरे देही नैव कुर्वन् न कारयन्
The self-restrained embodied self (man), renouncing all actions by his mind, (but performing actions by his body) lives at ease within the city of mine gates, (his body) doing nothing and causing nothing to be done.

न कर्तृत्वं न कर्माणि लोकस्य सृजति प्रभुः। न कर्मफलसंयोगं स्वभावस्तु
The Lord does neither create the capacity of action in man, nor the cause of actions, nor the connection of action and its fruits. The Nature only works.

नादत्ते कस्यचित् पापं न चैव सुकृतं विभुः। अज्ञानेनावृतं ज्ञानं तेन मुह्यन्ति जन्तवः
The Lord receives no one's sins, nor virtues of any. Knowledge is enveloped by ignorance. For this reason creatures are deluded.

ज्ञानेन तु तदज्ञानं येषां नाशितमात्मनः। तेषामादित्यवज्ज्ञानं प्रकाशयति तत्परम्
To those who have destroyed this ignorance by the knowledge of Self, this knowledge like the Sun shows forth the Supreme.

तद्बुद्धयस्तदात्मानस्तनिष्ठास्तत्परायणाः। गच्छन्त्यपुनरावृत्तिं ज्ञाननिषूतकल्मषाः
Those, whose mind is in Him, whose very self is He, who is devoted to Him, whose goal is He, depart, never to return, their sins having been destroyed by knowledge.

प्रवर्तते विद्याविनयसम्पन्ने ब्राह्मणे गवि हस्तिनि। शुनि चैव श्वपाके च पण्डिताः समदर्शिनः
The truly wise men look on a Brahmana, endued with learning and humility and on a cow, an elephant, a dog and a Chandala, as all alike.

इहैव तैर्जितः सर्गो येषां साम्ये स्थितं मनः। निर्दोषं हि समं ब्रह्म तस्माद् ब्रह्मणि ते स्थिताः
Even here the material world is conquered by those whose minds rest on equability. As Brahma is faultless and equable, therefore they rest in Brahma.

न प्रहृष्येत् प्रियं प्राप्य नोद्विजेत् प्राप्य चाप्रियम्। स्थिरबुद्धिरसम्मूढो ब्रह्मविद् ब्रह्मणि स्थितः
The man, who rest in Brahma, whose mind is steady, and who is not deluded, does not exult on obtaining any thing agreeable or does not grieve for getting any thing disagreeable,

बाह्यस्पर्शेष्वसत्तात्मा विन्दत्यात्मनि यत् सुखम्। स ब्रह्मयोगयुक्तात्मा सुखमक्षयमश्नुते
One, whose self is not attached to external objects, obtains the happiness that is in one's self; and he, having his self united with Brahma, obtains the happiness which is imperishable.

ये हि संस्पर्शजा भोगा दुःखयोनय एव ते। आद्यन्तवन्तः कौन्तेय बुधः
The pleasures, derived from objects of sense, are the sources of misery, and they have a beginnings as well as an end. Therefore, O son of Kunti, 'a wise man docs not feel any pleasures in them.

शक्नोतीहैव य: सोढुं प्राक शरीरविमोक्षणात्। कामक्रोधोद्भवं वेगं युक्तः स सुखी नरः
He who is able to bear the agitation of desire and wrath, even in this world, before the dissolution of the body is united with God; he is happy.

योऽन्तः सुखोऽन्तरारामस्तथाऽन्तर्कोतिरेव यः। स योगी ब्रह्मनिर्वाणं ब्रह्मभूतोऽधिगच्छति न तेषु रमते
That Yogi, whose happiness is within himself whose recreations are within himself, becoming one with Brahma, obtains Brahma Nirvana (Self extinction in God).

लभन्ते ब्रह्मनिर्वाणमृषयः क्षीणकल्मषाः। छिन्नद्वैधा यतात्मानः सर्वभूतहिते रताः
The Rishis, whose sins are destroyed, whose misgivings are perished, who are selfrestraint and who are engaged in doing good to all beings, obtain Brahma Nirvana.

कामक्रोधवियुक्तानां यतीनां यतचेतसाम्। अभितो ब्रह्मनिर्वाणं वर्तते विदितात्मनाम्
Absorption in Brahma here in this world and hereafter in the next is obtained by those yogis who are free from wrath and desire, whose minds are under control and who have the knowledge of Self.

स्पर्शान् कृत्वा बहिर्बाह्यांश्चक्षुश्चैवान्ते भ्रुवोः। प्राणापानौ समौ कृत्वा नासाभ्यन्तरचारिणौ यतेन्द्रियमनोबुद्धिमुनिर्मोक्षपरायणः। विगतेच्छाभयक्रोधो यः सदा मुक्त एव सः
The Yogi, who being intent to obtain emancipation, has restrained his senses, mind and understanding, who is freed from desire, wrath and fear, who, excluding from his mind all external objects of sense, directing his sight between the brows, mingles into one the upward and the downward life-breaths and make them pass through the nostril, is sure to obtain emancipation.

भोक्तारं यज्ञतपसां सर्वलोकमहेश्वरम्। सुहृदं सर्वभूतानां ज्ञात्वा मां शान्तिमृच्छति
He, who knows Me as the enjoyer of all sacrifices and penances, the great lord of all the worlds and the friend of all creatures, obtain peace".

श्रीभगवानुवाच अनाश्रितः कर्मफलं कार्यं कर्म करोति यः। स संन्यासी च योगी च न निरग्निर्न चाक्रियः
The great one said He, who performs actions that ought to be performed, regardless of their fruits is a Sanyasi or Yogi, but not he who discard the sacrificial fire and obtains from all actions.

यं संन्यासमिति प्राहुर्योगं तं विद्धि पाण्डव। न ह्यसंन्यस्तसंकल्पो योगी भवति कश्चन
To the devotees who are free from desire and wrath, and a Yogi who has not renounced all his resolves.

आरुरुक्षोर्मुनेर्योगं कर्म कारणमुच्यते। योगारूढस्य तस्यैव शमः कारणमुच्यते
To the sage who desires to rise to Yoga, action is said to be the means; and when he has risen to Yoga, Samadhi (cessation of all actions) is said to be the means.

यदा हि नेन्द्रियार्थेषु न कर्मस्वनुषज्जते। सर्वसंकल्पसंन्यासी योगारूढस्तदोच्यते
When one is no longer attached to the objects of sense, nor to actions, and when one renounces all his resolves, then is he said to have risen to Yoga.

उद्धरेदात्मनाऽऽत्मानं नात्मानमवसादयेत्। आत्मैव ह्यात्मनो बन्धुरात्मैव रिपुरात्मनः
One should elevate his self by self one should not degrade his self a man's self is his friend and his own self is also his enemy.

बन्धुरात्माऽऽत्मनस्तस्य येनात्मैवाऽऽत्मना जितः। अनात्मनस्तु शत्रुत्वे वर्तेतात्मैव शत्रुवत्
To him, who has subjugated his self, his self has become a friend but to him who has not subjugated his self, his self.

जितात्मनः प्रशान्तस्य परमात्मा समाहितः। शीतोष्णसुखदुःखेषु तथा मानापमानयोः
The self of one who has subjugated his self, and who has attained peace, is absolutely fixed in itself in the midst of cold and heat, pleasures and pain, honour and dishonour.

ज्ञानविज्ञानतृप्तात्मा कूटस्थो विजितेन्द्रियः। युक्त इत्युच्यते योगी समलोष्टाश्मकाञ्चनः
That Yogi is said to have risen to Yoga, whose self is contented with knowledge and science (experience), who is unmoved, who is self-restrained, and to whom clay, stone and gold are alike.

सुहृन्मित्रार्युदासीनमध्यस्थद्वेष्यबन्धुषु। साधुष्वपि च पायेषु समबुद्धिर्विशिष्यते
He is distinguished above all others who considers alike his well-wishers, friends and enemies, and those that are indifferent, and those that take part with both sides, and those who are objects of hatred and those that are related to him and those that are good and those that are wicked.

योगी युञ्जीत सततमात्मानं रहसि स्थितः। एकाकी यतचित्तात्मा निराशीरपरिग्रहः
A devotee, remaining in a secluded place, should always devote his mind in contemplation, along with his mind, and selfrestrained, with no expectations, and with no concern (with any thing).

शुचौ देशे प्रतिष्ठाप्य स्थिरमासनमात्मनः। नात्युच्छ्रितं नातिनीचं चैलाजिनकुशोत्तरम् तत्रैकाग्रं मनः कृत्वा यतचित्तेन्द्रियक्रियः। उपविश्यासने युज्याद् योगमात्मविशुद्धये
Fixing his seat firmly on a clean spot, not too high and not too low, and spreading over it a piece of cloth, a deer-skin and Kusha (grass), there, seated on that seat, with his mind fixed on one point, and restraining his mind and senses, one should practice contemplation for the purification of his self.

समं कायशिरोनीवं धारयन्नचलं स्थिरः। सम्प्रेक्ष्य नासिकाग्रं स्वं दिशश्चानवलोकयन्
even Holding body, head and neck unmoved and steady, and fixing his sight on the tip of his own nose, and without loO king about in all directions,

प्रशान्तात्मा विगतभीब्रह्मचारिखते स्थितः। मनः संयम्य मच्चित्तो युक्ते आसीत मत्परः
With his self in tranquility, freed from fcar, adhering to the practices of Brahmacharies, he should restrain his mind, fix his heart on Me and sit down, regarding Me as his final goal.

युञ्जन्नेवं सदाऽऽत्मानं योगी नियतमानसः। शान्तिं निर्वाणपरमां मत्संस्थामधिगच्छति
Thus constantly devoting his self to abstraction and contemplation, the Yogi whose mind is restrained, attains that peace which culminates in final absorption and assimilation with Me.

नात्यश्नतस्तु योगोऽस्ति न चैकान्तमनश्नतः। न चाति स्वप्नशीलस्य जाग्रतो नैव चार्जुन
Devotion is not achieved by the man. O Arjuna, who eats too much, or eats nothing, who is addicted to too much sleep, or is always awake.

युक्ताहारविहारस्य युक्तचेष्टस्य कर्मसु। युक्तस्वप्नावबोधस्य योगो भवति दुःखहा
The devotion that destroys misery is achieved by the man who is temperate in food and amusements, who toils duly in all his works and who is temperate in both sleep and vigils.

यदा विनियतं चित्तमात्मन्येवावतिष्ठते। निः :स्पृहः सर्वकामेभ्यो युक्त इत्युच्यते तदा
When his mind, having been well restrained, becomes fixed on one's own self then, that man, being indifferent to all objects of desire, is called a yogi.

यथा दीपो निवातस्थो नेङ्गते सोपमा स्मृता। योगिनो यतचित्तस्य युञ्जतो योगमात्मनः
A light, in a place where there is no air, flickers not; this has been cited as a simile to a yogi whose mind has been restrained, and who devotes himself to abstraction.

यत्रोपरमते चित्तं निरुद्धं योगसेवया। यत्र चैवात्मनाऽऽत्मानं पश्यन्नात्मनि तुष्यति
That (state) in which mind, being retrained, ceases to work, in which one, seeing the self by self, is pleased in self.

सुखमात्यन्तिकं यत्तद् बुद्धिचाह्यमतीन्द्रियम्। वेत्ति यत्र न चैवायं स्थितश्चलति तत्त्वतः
In which one experiences that infinite felicity which is beyond the sphere of the senses, and which Buddhi (understanding) can only grasp, and adhering to which one never Swerve from the truth.

यं लब्वा चापरं लाभं मन्यते नाधिकं ततः। यस्मिन् स्थितो न दुःखेन गुरुणापि विचाल्यते
Acquiring which one considers no other acquisition higher than it, and adhering to which, one is not moved even in the greatest misery.

तं विद्याद् दुःखसंयोगवियोगं योगसंज्ञितम्। स निश्चयेन योक्तव्यो योगोऽनिर्विण्णचेतसा
That state should be understood to be called Yoga, in which there is a complete severance of all connection with pain. Such Yoga should be practised with steadiness, and with an undisponding heart.

संकल्पप्रभवान् कामांस्त्यक्त्वा सर्वानशेषतः। मनसैवेन्द्रियग्रामं विनियम्य समन्ततः
Abandoning without exception all desires, that produced from resolves, and restraining by mind only the entire group of the senses.

शनैः शनैरुपरमेद् बुद्ध्या धृतिगृहीतया। आत्मसंस्थं मनः कृत्वा न किंचिदपि चिन्तयेत्
One should, by slow degrees, cease of think the objects of senses, with the. help of his understanding and controlled by patience, and then directing his mind to self.

यतो यतो निश्चरति मनश्चञ्चलमस्थिरम्। ततस्ततो नियम्यैतदात्मन्येव वशं नयेत्
Whereas the restless and unsteady mind wants to stray away, one should always restrain it and fix it steadily on the self alone. are

प्रशान्तमनसं ह्येनं योगिनं सुखमुत्तमम्। उपैति शान्तरजसं ब्रह्मभूतमकल्मषम्
To such a yogi, whose mind is in peace, whose passions have been suppressed, who has become one with Brahma, and who is agree from sin, highest felicity indeed comes by itself.

युञ्जन्नेव सदाऽऽत्मानं योगी विगतकल्मषः। सुखेन ब्रह्मसंस्पर्शमत्यन्तं सुखमश्नुते
Thus constantly devoting his self to abstraction, a yogi, being freed from sin, casily achieves the supreme happiness, namely the contact with Brahma.

सर्वभूतस्थमात्मानं सर्वभूतानि चात्मनि। ईक्षते योगयुक्तात्मा सर्वत्र समदर्शनः
I am never lost to him and he is never lost to Me, who sees Me in everything, and sees every thing in Me.

यो मां पश्यति सर्वत्र सर्वं च मयि पश्यति। तस्याहं न प्रणश्यामि स च मे न प्रणश्यति
He, who has devoted his self to abstraction, loO king alike on everything, sees his self in all creatures in his self.

सर्वभूतस्थितं यो मां भजत्येकत्वमास्थितः। सर्वथा वर्तमानोऽपि स योगी मयि वर्तते
He, who worships Me abiding in all creatures, and thinking that all is one, lives in Me, whatever may be the mode of his living.

आत्मौपम्येन सर्वत्र समं पश्यति योऽर्जुन। सुखं वा यदि वा दुःखं स योगी परमो मतः
The Yogi, O Arjuna, who casts an equal eye everywhere, loO king alike pain and pleasure, and considering a'l things as his own self, and the happiness and the misery of others as his own is deemed to be the besi.

अर्जुन उवाच योऽयं योगस्त्वया प्रोक्तः साम्येन मधुसूदन। एतस्याहं न पश्यामि चञ्चलत्वात् स्थिति स्थिराम् चञ्चलं हि मनः कृष्ण प्रमाथि बलवद् दृढम्। तस्याहं निग्रहं मन्ये वायोरिव सुदुष्करम्
Arjuna said I cannot see, O destroyer of Madhu, how can this Yoga by, Equanimity, which you have declared to me, be made to have a continual existence. For, O Krishna, mind is fickle, boisterous, perverse and obstinate; and I think to restrain it is as difficult as to restrain the wind.

श्रीभगवानुवाच असंशयं महाबाहो मनो दुर्निग्रहं चलम्। अभ्यासेन तु कौन्तेय वैराग्येण च गृह्यते
The great One said The mind, O mighty-armed, is surely difficult to be restrained, and it is restless. With constant practice, however, and with the abandonment of desire, O son of Kunti, is may be restrained.

असंयतात्मना योगो दुष्प्राप इति मे मतिः। वश्यात्मना तु यतता शक्योऽवाप्तुमुपायतः
It is my belief that devotion is difficult to be achieved by one who does not restrain his self. But it can be achieved through proper expedients by one whose mind is restrained and who is assiduous.

अर्जुन उवाच अयतिः श्रद्धयोपेतो योगाच्चलितमानसः। अप्राप्य योगसंसिद्धिं कां गतिं कृष्ण गच्छति
Arjuna said What is the end of him, O Krishna who has not earned success in devotion, being not assiduous, and having a mind shaken off from devotion, through full of faith?

कश्चिन्नोभयविभ्रष्टश्छिन्नाभ्रमिव नश्यति। अप्रतिष्ठो महाबाहो विमूढो ब्रह्मणः पथि
Does he, O mighty-armed, having fallen from both, go to ruin like a broken cloud, being without support and deluded of the path to Brahma?

एतन्मे संशयं कृष्ण छेत्तुमर्हस्यशेषतः। त्वदन्यः संशयस्यास्य छेत्ता न ह्युपपद्यते
It is you, O Krishna, who can entirely destroy this doubt of mine; for none else can destroy it.

श्रीभगवानुवाच पार्थ नैवेह नामुत्र विनाशस्तस्य विद्यते। न हि कल्याणकृत् कश्चिद् दुर्गतिं तात गच्छति
The great one said O Partha, neither in this world, nor in the next such a man is ruined, for, O dear friend, none, who performs good deeds, comes to an evil end.

प्राप्य पुण्यकृतां लोकानुषित्वाशाश्वतीः समाः। शुचीनां श्रीमतां गेहे योगभ्रष्टोऽभिजायते
He, who has not been able to achieve Yoga, goes to the worlds of those who perform good acts. He lives there for many years, and is then born into a family of holy and rich men;

अथवा योगिनामेव कुले भवति धीमताम्। एतद्धि दुर्लभतरं लोके जन्म यदीदृशम्
Or he is born into a family of intelligent devotees; for, such a birth as this is difficult to attain to this work.

तत्र तं बुद्धिसंयोगं लभते पौर्वदेहिकम्। यतते च ततो भूयः संसिद्धौ कुरुनन्दन
There comes he in contact with the knowledge of Brahma, which belonged to him in his former life; and then, O descendant of Kuru, he works again for perfection.

पूर्वाभ्यासेन तेनैव ह्रियते ह्यवशोऽपि सः। जिज्ञासुरपि योगस्य शब्दब्रह्मातिवर्तते
Even though unwilling, he is led to work on for perfection on account of the devotional practice practised in his former birth. Although he only wishes to learn yoga, he still rises above the fruits of action, laid down in the sacred word, the Vedas.

प्रयत्नाद् यतमानस्तु योगी संशुद्धकिल्बिषः। अनेकजन्मसंसिद्धस्ततो याति परां गतिम्
The devotee, having been cleared of his sins, attains to perfection after many births, by working with great efforts, and he then reaches the supreme goal.

तपस्विभ्योऽधिको योगी ज्ञानिभ्योऽपि मतोऽधिकः। कर्मिभ्यश्चाधिको योगी तस्माद् योगी भवार्जुन
The Yogi is considered to be superior to the ascetics who perform penances, superior even to a man of true knowledge, he is higher than the men of action. Therefore, ( Arjuna, become a Yogi.

योगीनामपि सर्वेषां मद्गतेनान्तरात्मना। श्रद्धावाम्भजते यो मां स मे युक्ततमो मतः
Even amongst all Yogis, he who being full of faith, worships Me with his inmost self being intent on Me, is considered by Me, to be the most devout.

श्रीभगवानुवाच मय्यासक्तमनाः पार्थ योगं युञ्जन् मदाश्रयः। असंशयं समग्रं मां यथा ज्ञास्यसि तच्छृणु
The great One said "Now hear, O Partha, how you can without doubt, know Me fully, by fixing your mind on Me, practicing yoga, and taking refuge in Me.

ज्ञानं तेऽहं सविज्ञानमिदं वक्ष्याम्यशेषतः। यज्ज्ञान्चा नेह भूयोऽन्यज्ज्ञातव्यमवशिष्यते
I shall now tell you exhaustively about Knowledge together with science (experience) knowing which there will remain nothing more (for you) in this world to know.

मनुष्याणां सहस्रेषु कश्चिद् यतति सिद्धये। यतततामपि सिद्धानां कश्चिन्मां वेत्ति तत्त्वतः
One only among thousands of men tries to get perfection; and even among those that are assiduous and have achieved perfection, only very few know Me truly.

भूमिरापोऽनलो वायुः खं मनो बुद्धिरेव च। अहंकार इतीयं मे भिन्ना प्रकृतिरष्टधा
(Earth, Water, Fire, Air, Space, Mind, Understanding, and Consciousness) thus is My Nature divided eight-fold.

अपरेयमितस्त्वन्या प्रकृतिं विद्धि मे पराम्। जीवभूतां महाबाहो ययेदं धार्यते जगत्
But this is lower form of My Nature. Know there is another form of My Nature higher than this, which is animate and by which, O mightyarmed, the universe is upheld.

एतद्योनीनि भूतानि सर्वाणीत्युपधारय। अहं कृत्स्नस्य जगतः प्रभवः प्रलयस्तथा
Know, that all things have these (Earth, Water &c.) for their source. I am the productive Cause and the destroying Agent of all the Universe.

मत्तः परतरं नान्यत् किंचिदस्ति धनंजय। मयि सर्वमिदं प्रोतं सूत्रे मणिगणा इव।
There is, O Dhananjaya, nothing higher than Myself. All this is woven on Me like a row of pearls in a string.

रसोऽहमप्सु कौन्तेय प्रभाऽस्मि शशिसूर्ययोः। प्रणवः सर्ववेदेषु शब्दः खे पौरुषं नृषु
I am the taste in water, I am the light in the Sun and the Moon; I am “Om” in all the Vedas, the sound in space, and manliness in man.

पुण्यो गन्धः पृथिव्यां च तेजश्चास्मि विभावसौ। जीवनं सर्वभूतेषु तपश्चास्मि तपस्विषु
I am the fragrance in the earth, the refulgence in the fire, I am the life in all beings, and the penance in ascetics.

बीजं मां सर्वभूतानां विद्धि पार्थ सनातनम्। बुद्धिर्बुद्धितामस्मि तेजस्तेजस्विनामहम्
Know Me, O Partha, to be the everlasting seed of all beings. I am the intelligence of all intelligent men, and the glory of all glorious objects.

बलं बलवतां ग्राहं कामरागविवर्जितम्। धर्माविरुद्धो भूतेषु कामोऽस्मि भरतर्षभ
I am the strength of the strong who are freed from desire and thirst. And I am the love, O the best of Bharata race among all beings, unopposed to virtue.

ये चैव सात्त्विका भावा राजसास्तामसाश्च ये। मत्त एवेति तान् विद्धि न त्वह तेषु ते मयि
And all existing things of Sattva, Raja and Tama Gunas (the qualities of goodness of passion and of darkness), are all from Me. I am, however, not in them; they are in Me.

त्रिभिर्गुणमयैर्भावैरेभिः सर्वमिदं जगत्। मोहितं नाभिजानाति मामेभ्यः परमव्ययम्
This whole universe, deluded by these three qualities, does not know Me, who are beyond them, and undecaying.

दैवी ह्येषा गुणमयी मम माया दुरत्यया। मामेव ये प्रपद्यन्ते मायामेतां तरन्ति ते
The Illusion of Mine, developed from the said three qualities is marvelous and difficult to transcend. Those, that resort to Me alone, cross beyond this illusion.

न मां दुष्कृतिनो मूढाः प्रपद्यन्ते नराधमाः। माययाऽपहतज्ञानां आसुरं भावमाश्रिताः
Ignorant men, the doers of evil, and the worst of their species, being deprived of their knowledge by this illusion and wedded to the state of demons, do not resort to Me.

चतुर्विधा भजन्ते मां जनाः सुकृतिनोऽर्जुन। आर्तो जिज्ञासुरर्थार्थी ज्ञानी च भरतर्षभ।
O Arjuna, four classes of doers of good acts worship me, namely he who is distressed, he who seeks after knowledge, he who wants wealth and he who is possessed of knowledge.

तेषां ज्ञानी नित्ययुक्त एकभक्तिर्विशिष्यते। प्रियो हि ज्ञानिनोऽत्यर्थमहं स च मम प्रियः
Amongst these (four classes of men) he, who is the possessor of knowledge, being devoted, and having faith on only the one, is considered to be superior to the rest. For to a man of (true) knowledge, I am dear above every thing and he is dear to Me.

उदारा: सर्व एवैते ज्ञानी त्वात्मैव मे मतम्। आस्थितः स हि युक्तात्मा मामेवानुत्तमां गतिम्
All these four classes of men are noble, but a man, who is possessed of knowledge, is. considered by Me as My own self. For he, with his self devoted to abstraction, has taken Me to be the goal than which there is nothing higher.

बहूनां जन्मनामन्ते ज्ञानवान् मां प्रपद्यते। वासुदेवः सर्वमिति स महात्मा सुदुर्लभः
The man of knowledge reaches Me at the end of many lives, believing that Vasudeva is all this, (everything and all things of the universe). But such a high souled man is exceedingly rare.

कामैस्तैस्तैर्हतज्ञानाः प्रपद्यन्तेऽन्यदेवताः। तं तं नियममास्थाय प्रकृत्या नियताः स्वया।
Those, that are deprived of knowledge by desire, reach other gods (divinities), by observing various (religious) regulations, and by being uncontrolled by their own nature.

यो यो यां यां तनुं भक्तः श्रद्धयाग्रतुमिच्छति। तस्य तस्याचलां श्रद्धां तामेव विदधाम्यहम्
Whichever form (of deity) a worshiper wishes to worship with faith, I make his faith steady in that form.

स तया श्रद्धया युक्तस्तस्याराधनमीहते। लभते च ततः कामान् मयैव विहितान् हि तान्
endued with this faith, such a worshiper adore the deity (in that form), and obtains from it all that he desires, though they are really given by Me.

तद् भवत्यल्पमेधसाम्। देवान् देवयजो यान्ति मद्भक्ता यान्ति मामपि।
But the fruits thus obtained by men of no knowledge are perishable. Those that worship the divinities (gods) go to the divinities; while those that worship Me come to Me.

अव्यक्तं व्यक्तिमापन्नं मन्यन्ते मामबुद्धयः। परं भावमजानन्तो ममाव्ययमनुत्तमम्
The undiscerning ones regard Me, who am really unmanifest to have become manifest; because they do not know my transcendent and inexhaustible state, that which there is nothing higher.

नाहं प्रकाशः सर्वस्य योगमायासमावृतः। मूढोऽयं नाभिजानाति लोको मामजमव्ययम्
Shrouded by the delusion of My inconceivable power, I am not manifest to all. This deluded world, knows not Me who am unborn and undecaying.

अन्तवत्तु फलं तेषां वेदाहं समतीतानि वर्तमानानि चार्जुन। भविष्याणि च भूतानि मां तु वेद न कश्चन
O Arjuna, I know the things that are past; I know all things that are present and (know also) all things that will be in the future. But there is none who knows Me.

इच्छाद्वेषसमुत्थेन द्वन्द्वमोहेन भारत। सर्वभूतानि सम्मोहं सर्गे यान्ति परंतप
All beings, O terror of foes, at the time of their birth, are deluded by this delusion arising, O Bharata, from the pairs of opposites, and from the results of desire and aversion.

येषां त्वन्तगतं पापं जनानां पुण्यकर्मणाम्। ते द्वन्द्वमोहनिर्मुक्ता भजन्ते मां दृढव्रताः
But the men of meritorious acts whose sins have all come to an end worship Me, being freed from the pairs of opposites and firin in their faith.

जरामरणमोक्षाय मामाश्रित्य यतन्ति ये। ते ब्रह्म तद् विदुः कृत्स्नमध्यात्म कर्म चाखिलम्
Those, who depending on me, tries to obtain release from decay and death know Brahma, the entire Adhyatma and all actions.

साधिभूताधिदैवं मां साधियज्ञं च ये विदुः। प्रयाणकालेऽपि च मां ते विदुर्युक्तचेतसः
And they who know Me with Adhibhuta, the Adhidaiva and the Adhiyajna having their minds fixed in abstraction know Me at the time of their departure (from this world)".

अर्जुन उवाच किं तद् ब्रह्म किमध्यात्मं किं कर्म पुरुषोत्तम। अधिभूतं च किं प्रोक्तमधिदैवं किमुच्यते
Arjuna said “What is Brahma, what is Adhyatma and what is, O best of men, Action? And again, what is (meant by) Adhibhuta, Adhidaiva.

अधियज्ञः कथं कोऽत्र देहेऽस्मिन् मधुसूदन। प्रयाणकाले च कथं ज्ञेयोऽसि नियतात्मभिः
And Adhiyajna, and how (they are in this body), O destroyer of Madhu? And how, too, are you to be known by those who restrain their selves, at the time of their death”.

श्रीभगवानुवाच अक्षरं ब्रह्म परमं स्वभावोऽध्यात्ममुच्यते। भूतभावोद्भवकरो विसर्गः कर्मसंज्ञितः
The great one said “The Brahma is the supreme, and the indestructible. Adhyatma is called its manifestation, and offering (to the divinities) which is the cause of the production and the development of all things, is called Action.

अधिभूतं क्षरो भावः पुरुषश्चाधिदैवतम्। अधियज्ञोऽहमेवात्र देहे देहभृतां वर
Adhibhuta is all perishable things. Adhidaiva is the (primal) Male-Being. And O best of men, Adhiyajna is I myself in this body.

अन्तकाले च मामेव स्मरन् मुक्त्वा कलेवरम्। यः प्रयाति स मद्भायंव याति नास्त्यत्र संशयः
He, who casts off this body and departs from this world, remembering Me in his last moments. comes to My essence. There is no doubt in it.

यं यं वापि स्मरन् भावं त्यजत्यन्ते कलेवरम्। तं तमेवैति कौन्तेय सदा तद्भावभावितः
And again, whichever from of divinity he remembers when he finally leaves this body and departs from this world, to him, O son of Kunti, he goes, having habitually meditated upon him.

तस्मात् सर्वेषु कालेषु मामनुस्मर युध्य च। मय्यर्पितमनोबुद्धिर्मामेवैष्यस्यसंशयम्
Therefore, think and remember Me at all times, and engage in battle. Fixing your mind and understanding on Me, you will surely come to Me. There is no doubt in it.

अभ्यासयोगयुक्तेन चेतसा नान्यगामिना। परमं पुरुषं दिव्यं याति पार्थानुचिन्तयन्
He, who things of the supreme Divine Being, O Partha, with a mind not running to other objects and possessing of concentration of mind in continuous meditation, goes to the Supreme Being.

रमणोरणीयांसमनुस्मरेद् यः। मादित्यवर्णं तमसः परस्तात् प्रयाणकाले मनसाऽचलेन भक्त्या युक्तो योगबलेन चैव। भूवोर्मध्ये प्राणमावेश्य सम्यक् स तं परं पुरुषमुपैति दिव्यम्
He attains to that transcendent and Divine being, who possessed of reverence for Him, with a steady mind and power of devotion, properly concentrating the life breath between the brows, meditates on that ancient Seer, the ruler of all the minutes of the minute, the supporter of all, whose form is inconceivable, whose brilliance is that of the sun and who is beyond all darkness.

यदक्षरं वेदविदो वदन्ति विशन्ति यद्यतयो वीतरागाः। यदिच्छन्तो ब्रह्मचर्यं चरन्ति तत्ते पदं संग्रहेण प्रवक्ष्ये
I shall tell you briefly about the seat which the persons, learned in the Vedas, say indestructible, which is entered by ascetics, who are freed from all desires, and which wishing to obtain, men follow the path of Brahmacharis.

सर्वद्वाराणि संयम्य मनो हृदि निरुध्य च। मूर्ध्याधायात्मनः प्राणमास्थितो योगधारणाम् ओमित्येकाक्षरं ब्रह्म व्याहरन् मामनुस्मरन्। यः प्रयाति त्यजन् देहं स याति परमां गतिम्
He reaches the highest goal who casts off his body and departs, by stopping all passages (senses), confining the mind within itself, placing his own life-breath between the eyebrows, adhering to uninterrupted meditation, uttering the one syllable Om which is Brahma, and thinking Me.

अनन्यचेताः सततं यो मां स्मरति नित्यशः। तस्याहं सुलभः पार्थ नित्ययुक्तस्य योगिनः
To that Yogi, O Partha, I am easy of access who always meditate on Me, by withdrawing his mind from all other objects, and who constantly practices abstraction.

मामुपेत्य पुनर्जन्म दुःखालयमशाश्वतम्। नाप्नुवन्ति महात्मानः संसिद्धिं परमां गताः
Those high-souled men, who achieve the highest perfection, attaining to Me, do not again take birth, which is the abode of sorrow, and transient.

आब्रह्मभुवनाल्लोकाः पुनरावर्तिनोऽर्जुन। मामुपेत्य तु कौन्तेय पुनर्जन्म न विद्यते
All (beings of all) the worlds, O Arjuna, from the world of Brahma, have to take rebirth, But, O son of Kunti, after attaining to Me, there is no rebirth,

सहस्रयुगपर्यन्तमहर्यद् ब्रह्मणो विदुः। रात्रिं युगसहस्रान्तां तेऽहोरात्रविदो जनाः
Those who know the day of Brahma, as being of one thousand ages, and a night of his, as being of one thousand ages (Yuga) know Day and Night.

अव्यक्ताद् व्यक्तयः सर्वाः प्रभवन्त्यहरागमे। रात्र्यागमे प्रलीयन्ते तत्रैवाव्यक्तसंज्ञके
On the advent of Day, all things that are manifest are produced from the unmanifest and on the advent of Night, all things dissolve into that which is called unmanifest.

भूतग्रामः स एवायं भूत्वा भूत्वा प्रलीयते। रात्र्यागमेऽवशः पार्थ प्रभवत्यहरागमे
The same assemblage of beings, being manifest (born), again and again, dissolves on the advent of Night, and O Partha, on the advent of Day, they spring forth again, being constrained by the force of actions,

परस्तस्मात्तु भावोऽन्योऽव्यक्तोऽव्यक्तात् सनातनः। यः स सर्वेषु भूतेषु नश्यत्सु न विनश्यति
But there is another entity, unmanifested and eternal, which is beyond the unmanifested beings, and which is not destroyed when all entities are destroyed.

अव्यक्तोऽक्षर इत्युक्तस्तमाहुः परमां गतिम्। यं प्राप्य न निवर्तन्ते तद्धाम परमं मम
It is called unmanifested and indestructible; they call it the highest goal. Attaining to it, none has to come back,

पुरुषः स परः पार्थ भक्त्या लभ्यस्त्वनन्यया। यस्यान्तः स्थानि भूतानि येन सर्वमिदं ततम्
The Supreme Being, O Partha, in which all beings dwell, and by whom an beings are permeated, is to be attained by faith, undirected to any other objects.

यत्र काले त्वनावृत्तिमावृतिं चैव योगिनः। प्रयाता यान्ति तं कालं वक्ष्यामि भरतर्षभ
I will state the times, O best of the Bharata race, at which Yogis, departing from this world, go never to return, or, to return.

अग्निोतिरहः शुक्लः षण्मासा उत्तरायणम्। तत्र प्रयाता गच्छन्ति ब्रह्म ब्रह्मविदो जनाः
Departing from the world in the Fire, the flame, the Day, the Bright-Fortnight, the Six months of the northern Solstice, one, if he knows Him, goes to Brahma, (never to return again).

धूमो रात्रिस्तथा कृष्णः षण्मासा दक्षिणायनम्। तत्र चान्द्रमसं ज्योतिर्योगी प्राप्य निवर्तते
Departing from this world in Smoke, Night, the Dark-Fortnight, the six months of the southern Solstice, one goes to the Lunar Light and returns to the world again.

शुक्लकृष्णे गती ह्येते जगतः शाश्वते मते। एकया यात्यनावृत्तिमन्ययाऽऽवर्तते पुनः
The Bright and the Dark, these two paths are considered to be eternal paths in this world. By the one, one goes never to return, by the other, one goes to come back.

नैते सृती पार्थ जानन् योगी मुह्यति कश्चन। तस्मात् सर्वेषु कालेषु योगयुक्तो भवार्जुन
Knowing these two paths, O Partha, no Yogi is deluded, and therefore, O Arjuna, at all times, be possessed of a Yoga.

वेदेषु यज्ञेषु तपःसु चैव दानेषु यत् पुण्यफलं प्रदिष्टम्। अत्येति तत्सर्वमिदं विदित्वा योगी परं स्थानमुपैति चाद्यम्
The meritorious fruits, prescribed in the Vedas, for sacrifices, for penances, for gifts, knowing all this, a Yogi attains to it, the highest and primeval seat.

श्रीभगवानुवाच इदं तु ते गुह्यतमं प्रवक्ष्याम्यनसूयवे। ज्ञानविज्ञानसहितं यज्ज्ञात्वा मोक्ष्यसेऽशुभात्
The great one said I shall now speak to you, O evilless one. all that mysterious knowledge, along with experience, by knowing which you will be freed from evil.

राजविद्या राजगुह्यं पवित्रमिदमुत्तमम्। प्रत्यक्षावगमं धर्म्यं सुसुखं कर्तुमव्ययम्
It is the chief science and the chief mystery; it is the chief means of purification. It is consistent with the sacred laws, easy to practice, directly apprehensible, and imperishable.

अश्रद्दधानाः पुरुषा धर्मस्यास्य परंतप। अप्राप्य मां निवर्तन्ते मृत्युसंसारवर्त्मनि
Those men, O terror of foes, who have no faith in this sacred doctrine, return to this mortal world without attaining to Me.

मया ततमिदं सर्वं जगदव्यक्तमूर्तिना। मत्स्थानि सर्वभूतानि न ग्राहं तेष्ववस्थितः
This whole universe is pervaded by Me in My unmanifested form. All things live in it.

न च मत्स्थानि भूतानि पश्य मे योगमैश्वरम्। भूतभृन्न च भूतस्थो ममात्मा भूतभावनः
And again all things are not in Me. See my divine power. Supporting all entities and producing all entities, My Self does not live in those entities.

यथाऽऽकाशस्थितो नित्यं वायुः सर्वत्रगो महान्। तथा सर्वाणि भूतानि मत्स्थानीत्युपधारय
As the great and ubiquitous atmosphere (without tainting) live, occupying space, so similarly all things live in Me.

सर्वभूतानि कौन्तेय प्रकृतिं यान्ति मामिकाम्। कल्पक्षये पुनस्तानि कल्पादौ विसृजाम्यहम्
All entities, O son of Kunti,, attain to My nature at the end of a Kalpa. And again at the beginning of a Kalpa I bring them forth.

प्रकृति स्वामवष्टभ्य विसृजामि पुनः पुनः। भूतग्राममिमं कृत्स्नमवशं प्रकृतेर्वशात्
Controlling My Nature Myself, I bring forth again, and again this whole assemblage of entities, which has no will of its own.

न च मां तानि कर्माणि निबध्नन्ति धनंजय। उदासीनवदासीनमसक्तं तेषु कर्मसु
But, Arjuna, these acts of mine do not fetter me, I sit like one unconcerned and unattached to those actions.

मयाध्यक्षेण प्रकृतिः सूयते सचराचरम्। हेतुनानेन कौन्तेय जगद् विपरिवर्तते
Through Me, the supervisor, primal Nature produces all movable and unmovable. Thus, O son of Kunti, the universe revolves.

अवजानन्ति मां मूढा मानुषीं तनुमाश्रितम्। परं भावमजानन्तो मम भूतमहेश्वरम् मोघाशा मोघकर्माणो मोघज्ञाना विचेतसः। राक्षसीमासुरीं चैव प्रकृति मोहिनीं श्रिताः
Not knowing My supreme Nature, the deluded people of vain hopes, vain acts, vain knowledge, of confounded minds, of the delusive nature of Asuris and Rakshasas, disregard Me as I have assumed a human body.

महात्मानस्तु मां पार्थ दैवी प्रकृतिमाश्रिताः। भजन्त्यनन्यमनसो ज्ञात्वा भूतादिमव्ययम्
but high-souled and divine-natured devotees,, O Partha, knowing Me as the origin of all things, worship Me with minds directed to nothingelse.

सततं कीर्तयन्तो मां यतन्तश्च दृढव्रताः। नमस्यन्तश्च मां भक्त्या नित्ययुक्ता उपासते
Always glorifying Me, exerting themselves with firm vows, bowing down to Me with reverence, being always devoted to Me they worship Me.

ज्ञानयज्ञेन चाप्यन्ये यजन्तो मामुपासते। एकत्वेन पृथक्त्वेन बहुधा विश्वतोमुखम्
Others again, performing the Sacrifice of knowledge, worship Me as one, as distinct, as pervading the universe in many forms

अहं क्रतुरहं यज्ञः स्वधाऽहमहमौषधम्। मन्त्रोऽहमहमेवाज्यमहमग्निरहं हुतम्
I am the Vedic Sacrifice, I am the Sacrifice laid down in the Smriti, I am the Sabda (mantra) I am the sacrificial libation; I am the fire; I am the offering.

पिताहमस्य जगतो माता धाता पितामहः। वेद्यं पवित्रमोंकार ऋक् साम यजुरेव च
I am the Father of the universe, its Mother, its Creator, its Grandsire. I am the Thing to be known, and the Means by which every thing is purified. I am the Om, the Rik, Saman and Yajus (Vedas).

गतिर्भर्ता प्रभुः साक्षी निवासः शरणं सुहृत्। प्रभवः प्रलयः स्थानं निधानं बीजमव्ययम्
I am the goal, the supporter, the lord, the on-looker, the asylum, the friend, the source, the support, the receptacle and the imperishable। seed.

तपाम्यहमहं वर्ष निगृह्णम्युत्सृजामि च। अमृतं चैव मृत्युश्च सदसच्चाहमर्जुन
I produce heat; I produce and stop showers. I am immortality, and I am also death. I am, O Arjuna, that which exists and which does not exist.

ते विद्या मां सोमपाः पूतपापा यज्ञैरिष्ट्वा स्वर्गतिं प्रार्थयन्ते। मश्नन्ति दिव्यान् दिवि देवभोगान्२०
Those, who know the three knowledge, who drink the Soma juice, who offer sacrifices, and whose sins are washed away, seek admission into . heaven. Reaching the holy world of the lord of the celestial, they enjoy the celestial pleasures of the gods in the celestial world.

ते तं भुक्त्वा स्वर्गलोकं विशालं क्षीणे पुण्ये मर्त्यलोकं विशन्ति। एवं त्रयीधर्ममनुप्रपन्ना गतागतं कामकामा लभन्ते
And having enjoyed the pleasures of the extensive heaven, when their merit is exhausted, they again enter into the mortal world. Those that wish for the objects of desire, and act according to the doctrines of these Vedas, obtain going and coming (births and deaths).

अनन्याश्चिन्तयन्तो मां ये जनाः पर्युपासते। तेषां नित्याभियुक्तानां योगक्षेमं वहाम्यहम्
I give new gifts to those men, and preserve those that have been already acquired, who worship Me, mediating on Me and who are constantly devoted to Me.

येऽप्यन्यदेवता भक्ता यजन्ते श्रद्धयाऽन्विता। तेऽपि मामेव कौन्तेय यजन्त्यविधिपूर्वकम्
Even those, O son of Kunti, who endued with faith, worship other gods, worship Me thought not in the regular way.

अहं हि सर्वयज्ञानां भोक्ता च प्रभुरेव च। न तु मामभिजानन्ति तत्त्वेनातश्च्यवन्ति ते
For I am the enjoyer, as well as the giver of fruits of all sacrifices. But they do not know Me truly, and therefore they fall from heaven,.

यान्ति देवव्रता देवान् पितॄन् यान्ति पितृव्रताः। भूतानि यान्ति भूतेज्या यान्ति मद्याजिनोऽपि माम्
Those who worship the Pitris, go to the Pitris, those who worship the Bhutas, go to the Bhutas, but those who worship Me, come to Me.

पत्र पुष्पं फलं तोयं यो मे भक्त्या प्रयच्छति। तदहं भक्त्युपहृतमश्नामि प्रयतात्मनः
I accept leaf, flowers, fruits, water, from him who is pure, and who with faith offers them to Me, if they are presented with devotion.

यत् करोषि यदश्नासि यज्जुहोषि ददासि यत्। यत्तपस्यसि कौन्तेय तत् कुरुष्वं मदर्पणम्
Whatever you do, O son of Kunti, whatever you eat, whatever you sacrifice, whatever you give, whatever penance you perform, do it in a way which may be an offering to Me.

शुभाशुभफलैरेवं मोक्ष्यसे कर्मबन्धनैः। संन्यासयोगयुक्तात्मा विमुक्तो मामुपैष्यसि
Thus will you be freed from the bonds of action, the fruits of which are both good and bad. With your self endued with renunciation and devotion, you will be freed (from the laws of rebirth), and you will come to Me.

समोऽहं सर्वभूतेषु न मे द्वेष्योऽस्ति न प्रियः। ये भजन्ति तु मां भक्त्या मयि ते तेषु चाप्यहम्
I am alike to all beings. No one is hateful, none is dear to Me. In whatever way they worship, if they worship with reverence, they are in Me, and I am in them.

अपि चेत् सुदुराचारो भजते मामनन्यभाक्। साधुरेव स मन्तव्यः सम्यग्व्यवसितो हि सः
If even an exceedingly wicked man worship Me, without worshipping any one else, he should certainly be regarded as a good (man), for his efforts are well-directed.

क्षिप्रं भवति धर्मात्मा शश्वच्छान्तिं निगच्छति। कौन्तेय प्रति जानीहि न मे भक्तः प्रणश्यति
Such a man soon becomes devout and virtuous minded, and attains eternal peace. Learn, O son of Kunti, he who is devoted to Me, is never lost.

मां हि पार्थ व्यपाश्रित्य येऽपि स्युः पापयोनयः। स्तेऽपि यान्ति परां गतिम्
Even those persons, Partha, who are of sinful birth, who are women, Vaishyas or Shudras, attain to the supreme goal, if they come to Me..

किं पुनर्ब्राह्मणाः पुण्या भक्ता राजर्षयस्तथा। अनित्यमसुखं लोकमिमं प्राप्य भजस्व माम्
What then should I speak of holy Brahmins and royal sages who are my devotees? Having come to this miserable and mortal world, O Partha, worship Me.

मन्मना भव मद्भक्तो मद्याजी मां नमस्कुरु। मामेवैष्यसि युक्त्वैवमात्मानं मत्परायणः
Fix your mind on Me, become My worshipper, become My devotee, bow to Me. Thus making Me your goal, and devoting yourself to obstruction, you will certainly come to Me.

श्रीभगवानुवाच भूय एव महाबाहो शृणु मे परमं वचः। यत्तेऽहं प्रीयमाणाय वक्ष्यामि हितकाम्यया
The great one said And again, O mighty-armed, listen to My words relating to the great Self. I tell them to you out of a wish for your welfare, and you, too, will be delighted with them.

न मे विदुः सुरगणाः प्रभवं न महर्षयः। अहमादिहि देवानां महर्षीणां च सर्वशः
The hosts of gods and great sages do not know my origin, for I am in every way the source of the gods and sages.

यो मामजमनादिं च वेत्ति लोकमहेश्वरम्। असम्मूढः स मर्येषु सर्वपापैः प्रमुच्यते
He, who knows Me to be unborn, free from delusion, without beginning, the supreme Lord of all the world, is released from all sins.

बुद्धिर्ज्ञानमसम्मोहः क्षमा सत्यं दमः शमः। सुखं दुःखं भवोऽभावो भयं चाभयमेव च
Intelligence, knowledge, absence from delusion, forgiveness, truth, self-restraint, tranquility, pleasure, pain, birth, fear and also security.

अहिंसा समता तुष्टिस्तपो दानं यशोऽयशः। भवन्ति भावा भूतानां मत्त एव पृथग्विधाः
Harmlessness, equanimity of mind; contentment, penance, offering gifts, fame, infamy, all these attributes of being arise from Me alone.

महर्षयः सप्त पूर्वे चत्वारो मनवस्तथा। मद्भावा मानसा जाता येषां लोक इमाः प्रजाः
The seven great Rishis, and also the four ancient Manus, pertaining my nature, were all born from my mind, (by My mere thinking). From them are all things born.

एतां विभूति योगं च मम यो वेत्ति तत्त्वतः। सोऽविकम्पेन योगेन युज्यते नात्र संशयः
He, who knows correctly these emanations and mystic powers of Mine, becomes possessed of unswerving devotion, there is no doubt about it.

अहं सर्वस्य प्रभवो मत्तः सर्वं प्रवर्तते। इति मत्वा भजन्ते मां बुधा भावसमन्विताः
The truly wise man, endued with My nature, worship Me, believing that I am the origin of all, and from Me all things proceed.

मच्चित्ता मद्गतप्राणा बोधयन्तः परस्परम्। कथयन्तश्च मां नित्यं तुष्यन्ति च रमन्ति च
Such men placing their minds on Me, devoting their lives to Me, instructing each other and speaking about Me, are always contended and happy.

तेषां सततयुक्तानां भजतां प्रीतिपूर्वकम्। ददामि बुद्धियोगं तं येन मामुपयान्ति ते
To such men I give that knowledge by which they attain to Me.

तेषामेवानुकम्पार्थमहमज्ञानजं तमः। नाशयाम्यात्मभावस्थो ज्ञानदीपेन भास्वता
Out of compassion for them I, remaining in their hearts, destroy, in such men, the darkness of ignorance, with the lamp of knowledge.

अर्जुन उवाच परं ब्रह्म परं धाम पवित्रं परमं भवान्। पुरुषं शाश्वतं दिव्यमादिदेवमजं विभुम्
Arjuna said You are the supreme Brahma, the supreme asylum, the holiest of the holy, the everlasting divine Being, the first of gods, unborn, the great Lord.

आहुस्त्वामृषयः सर्वे देवर्षि रदस्तथा। असितो देवलो व्यास: स्वयं चैव ब्रवीषि मे
All the Rishis, as well as the divine sages Narada, Asita, Devala, are thus. And you too, O Keshava, tell me yourself that it is so.

सर्वमेतदृतं मन्ये यन्मां वदसि केशव। न हि ते भगवन् व्यक्तिं विदुर्देवा न दानवाः
I believe all that you tell me, O holy one, for neither the gods nor the demons understand your manifestation,

स्वयमेवात्मनाऽऽत्मानं वेत्थं त्वं पुरुषोत्तम। भूतभावन भूतेष देवदेव जगत्पते
O best of beings, creator of all things, God of gods, Lord of the universe, you only know yourself by your great Self.

वक्तुमर्हस्यशेषेण दिव्या ह्यात्मविभूतयः। याभिविभूतिभिर्लोकानिमांस्त्वं व्याप्य तिष्ठसि
Kindly tell me without reservation your divine emanations, by which emanation you remain pervading all these worlds.

कथं विद्यामहं योगिस्त्वा सदा परिचिन्तयन्। केषु केषु च भावेषु चिन्त्योऽसि भगवन् मय
O you of mystic powers, how shall I know you by always mediating on you. In what particular entity (manifestation), should l mediate on you?

विस्तरेणात्मनो योगं विभूतिं च जनार्दन। भूयः कथय तृप्तिर्हि शृण्वतो नास्ति मेऽमृतम्
O Janardana, declare to me yourself, your powers and emanations, for hearing this ambrosia, I am not satiated.

श्रीभगवानुवाच हन्त ते कथयिष्यामि दिव्या ह्यात्मविभूतयः। प्राधान्यतः कुरुश्रेष्ठ नास्त्यन्तो विस्तरस्य मे
The great One said Well. O best of Kurus, I shall declare you my divine emanations, but I shall only tell you the chief ones, for there is no end of emanations.

अहमात्मा गुडाकेश सर्वभूताशयस्थितः। अहमादिश्च मध्यं च भूतानामन्त एव च
O Gudakesha, I am the Self in the heart of every being. I am the beginning the middle and the end of every thing.

आदित्यानामहं विष्णुर्कोतिषां रविरंशुमान्। मरीचिर्मरुतामस्मि नक्षत्राणामहं शशी
I am Vishnu amongst the Adityas, all resplendent Sun among all shining bodies. I am Marichi among Maruts, and the Moon among constellations.

वेदानां सामवेदोऽस्मि देवानामस्मि वासव।। इन्द्रियाणां मनश्चास्मि भूतानामस्मि चेतना
I am the Sama Veda among the Vedas, I am Indra among the celestial I am mind among the senses, I am the consciousness of all living things.

रुद्राणां शंकरश्चास्मि वित्तेशो यक्षरक्षसाम्। वसूना पावकश्चास्मि मेरुः शिखरिणामहम्
I am Shankara among the Rudras, I am the lord of treasures among Yakshas. I am Pavaka among the Vasus, and I am the Meru amongst the mountain peaks.

पुरोधसां च मुख्यं मां विद्धि पार्थ बृहस्पतिम्। सेनानीनामहं स्कन्दः सरसामस्मि सागरः
Know me, Partha, as Brihaspati among family priests, and Skanda among commanders of forces. I am occan among all waters.

महर्षीणां भृगुरहं गिरामसम्येकमक्षरम्। यज्ञानां जपयज्ञोऽस्मि स्थावराणां हिमालयः
I am Bhrigu among the great Rishis, I am Om among all words, I am Tapa Sacrifice among all sacrifices. I am the Himalaya among mountains.

अश्वत्थः सर्ववृक्षाणां देवर्षीणां च नारदः। गन्धर्वाणां चित्ररथः सिद्धानां कपिलो मुनिः
And the fig tree among all trees; I am Narada among celestial Rishis, and Chitraratha among Gandharvas. I un Kapila among all ascetics successful in Yoga.

उच्चैःश्रवसमश्वानां विद्धि माममृतोद्भवम्। ऐरावतं गजेन्द्राणां नराणां च नराधिपम्
Know me to be Uchaishrava among all horses, produced by the churning for ambrosia, and Airavata among the great elephants. I am king among men.

आयुधानामहं वज्रं धेनूनामस्मि कामधुक्। प्रजनश्चास्मि कन्दर्पः सर्पाणामस्मि वासुकिः
I am thunder among weapons; I am Kamadhuka among cows; I am Kandarpa that generates. I am Vasuki among serpents;

अनन्तश्चास्मि नागानां वरुणो यादसामहम्। पितॄणामर्यमा चास्मि यमः संयमतामहम्
I am Ananta among Nags. I am Varuna among aquatic beings, I am Aryaman among the Pitris and Yama among the dispensers of justice and punishment.

प्रह्लादश्चास्मि दैत्यानां कालः कलयतामहम्। मृगाणां च मृगेन्द्रोऽहं वैनतेयश्च पक्षिणाम्
I am Pralhada among Daityas, and the Kala among those who count. I am lion among the beasts of prey, and Garuda among birds.

पवनः पवतामस्मि रामः शस्त्रभृतामहम्। झषाणां मकरश्चास्मि स्रोतसामस्मि जाह्नवी
I am the wind among those that move, Rama among the wielders of weapons. I am Makara among fishes, I am the Ganges among all rivers and streams.

सर्गाणामादिरन्तश्च मध्यं चैवाहमर्जुन। अध्यात्मविद्या विद्यानां वादः प्रवदतामहम्
O Arjuna, I am the beginning, the middle and the end of all created things. I am the knowledge of the supreme Self among all kinds of knowledge, and I am the argument of all debtors.

अक्षराणाकारोऽस्मि द्वन्द्वः सामासिकस्य च। अहमेवाक्षयः कालो धाताऽहं विश्वतोमुखः
I am the first letter of the Alphabet and Dvandva (copulative) among all Samasa (compounds). I am the Eternal Time, I am the Creator with face turned to every side.

मृत्युः सर्वहरश्चाहमुद्भवश्च भविष्यताम्। कीर्तिः श्रीर्वाक् च नारीणां स्मृतिर्मेधा धृतिः क्षमा।।३४।
I am the Source of all that is to be. Among females, I am Fame, Fortune, Speech, Memory, Intellect, Courage, and Forgiveness.

बृहत्साम तथा साम्नां गायत्री छन्दसामहम्। मासानां मार्गशीर्षोऽहमृतूनां कुसुमाकरः
I am Brihata Saman among Samnas, and Gayatri among meters. I am Margashirsha among months, and among seasons I am the spring that is full of flowers.

द्यूतं छलयतामस्मि तेजस्तेजस्विनामहम्। जयोऽस्मि व्यवसायोऽस्मि सत्त्व सत्ववतामहम्
I am the dice-game among cheats, I am the glory among the glories. I am victory, I am industry, I am the goodness of the good.

वृष्णीनांवासुदेवोऽस्मि पाण्डवानां धनंजयः। मुनीनामप्यहं व्यासः कवीनामुशना कविः
I am Vasudeva among Vrishnis and Arjuna among the Pandavas. I am Vyasa among Rishis, and Ushanas among the Seers.

दण्डो दमयतामस्मि नीतिरस्मि जिगीषताम्। मौनं चैवास्मि गुह्यानां ज्ञानं ज्ञानवतामहम्
I am the rod of the chastisers, and the policy of those that seek victory. I am silence in secrets, and the knowledge of the learned.

यच्चापि सर्वभूताना बीजं तदहमर्जुन। न तदस्ति विना यत् स्यान्मया भूतं चराचरम्
I am, O Arjuna, that which is the seed of all things. There is nothing movable or immovable which can exist without Me.

नान्तोऽस्ति मम दिव्यानां विभूतीनां परंतप। एष तूद्देशतः प्रोक्तो विभूतेर्विस्तरो मया।
O terror of foes, there is no end of my divine emanations; the extent of my emanations in part has only been declared to you to cite instances.

यद् यद् विभूतमत् सत्त्वं श्रीमदूर्जितमेव वा। तत् तदेवावगच्छ त्वं मम तेजोऽशसम्भवम्
Whatever thing there is of power of glory or splendor, know them to be produced from portions of my energy.

अथवा बहुनैतेन किं ज्ञातेन तवार्जुन। विष्टभ्याहमिदं कृत्स्नमेकांशेन स्थितो जगत्।
O Arjuna, what have you to do, knowing all this at large? Know, I stand supporting this entire universe with only a portion of my Self.

अर्जुन उवाच मदनुग्रहाय परमं गुह्यमध्यात्मसंज्ञितम्। यत् त्वयोक्तं वचस्तेन मोहोऽयं विगतो मम
Arjuna said The excellent and mysterious words, relating to the Supreme Self and the individual Self, which you have spoken to me, have removed my delusion.

भवाप्ययौ हि भूतानां श्रुतौ विस्तरशो मया। त्वत्तः कमलपत्राक्ष माहात्म्यमपि चाव्ययम्
O lotus-eyed one, I have heard elaborately from you the mystery of production and dissolution of things, and also about your inexhaustible greatness.

एवमेतद् यथाऽऽत्थ त्वमात्मानं परमेश्वर। दुष्टुमिच्छामि ते रूपमैश्वरं पुरुषोत्तम
O great Lord, what you have said yourself is even so (perfectly true). I desire to see, O best of beings, your divine form.

मन्यसे यदि तच्छक्यं मया दुष्टुमिति प्रभो। योगेश्वर ततो मे त्वं दर्शयात्मानमव्ययम्
If, O Lord, you think that I am competent to see that form, then, O Lord of mystic powers, show me your inexhaustible form.

श्रीभगवानुवाच पश्य मे पार्थ रूपाणि शतशोऽथ सहस्रशः। नानाविधानि दिव्यानि नानावर्णाकृतीनि च
The great One said Behold, Partha, my forms by hundreds and thousands. They are various divine, and different in colour and form.

पश्यादित्यान् वसून् रुद्रानश्विनौ मरुतस्तथा। बहून्दृष्टपूर्वाणि पश्याच्चर्याणि भारत
Behold the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Ashvins and the Maruts. Behold, 0 Bharata, innumerable wonders, not seen by you before.

इहैकस्थं जगत् कृत्स्नं पश्याद्य सचराचरम्। मम देहे गुडाकेश यच्चान्यद् द्रष्टुमिच्छसि
Behold, Gudakesha, the entire universe of movable and immovable and whatever else you wish to see, all collected together in my this body.

न तु मां शक्यसे द्रष्टुमनेनैव स्वचक्षुषा। दिव्यं ददामि ते चक्षुः पश्य मे योगमैश्वरम्
But you are not fit to see Me with your these eyes. Therefore, I give you divine sight. Behold now my great mystic nature.

संजय उवाच एवमुक्त्वा ततो राजन् महायोगेश्वरो हरिः। दर्शयामास पार्थाय परमं रूपमैश्वरम्
Sanjaya continued O great king, having said this, the mighly lord of mystic powers, Hari, revealed to Partha his great divine form.

अनेकवक्त्रनयनमनेकाद्भुतदर्शनम्। अनेकदिव्याभरणं दिव्यानेकोद्यतायुधम्
With many mouths and eyes, with many wonderful aspects, with many celestial ornaments, with many upraised celestial weapons.

दिव्यमाल्याम्बरधरं दिव्यगन्धानुलेपनम्। सर्वाश्चर्यमयं देवमनन्तं विश्वतोमुखम्
Adorned with celestial garlands and robes, embalmed with celestial fragrance, and full of every wonder; it is resplendent and infinite with faces turned on all sides.

दिवि सूर्यसहस्रस्य भवेद् युगपदुत्थिता। यदि भाः सदृशी सा स्याद् भासस्तस्य महात्मनः
If splendor of one thousand suns burst forth all at once in the sky, that would be something like the splendor of that great one.

तत्रैकस्थं जगत् कृत्स्नं प्रविभक्तमनेकधा। अपश्यद् देवदेवस्य शरीरे पाण्डवस्तदा
Then the son of Pandu (Arjuna) saw the entire universe, divided and subdivided into many parts, but all collected together in the body of that God of all gods.

ततः स विस्मयाविष्टो हृष्टरोमा धनंजयः। प्रणम्य शिरसा देवं कृताञ्जलिरभाषत
Then filled with amazement, Dhananjaya, with his hairs standing on end, his head lowly bowed down and his hands joined together, addressed the great God thus:

अर्जुन उवाच पश्यामि देवांस्तव देव देहे सर्वांस्तथा भूतविशेषसंघान्। ब्रह्माणमीशं कमलासनस्थमृषीश्च सर्वानुरगांश्च दिव्यान्
Arjuna said I behold, O Great God, all the celestial and all the varied hosts of creatures. I behold Brahma seated on his lotus-seat; I behold all the great Rishis and divine Nagas.

अनेकबाहूदरवक्त्रनेत्रं पश्यामि त्वां सर्वतोऽनन्तरूपम्। नान्तं न मध्यं न पुनस्तवादिं पश्यामि विश्वेश्वर विश्वरूप
O you of infinite forms, I behold you on every side with innumerable arms, bellies, mouths, and eyes. O Lord of the universe, O you of universal form I do see neither your end, nor middle, nor the beginning.

किरीटिनं गदिनं चक्रिणं च तेजोराशिं सर्वतो दीप्तिमन्तम्। पश्यामि त्वां दुर्निरीक्ष्यं समन्ताद् दीप्तानलार्कद्युतिमप्रमेयम्
I behold you immeasurable, you whom it is difficult to look at. I behold you bearing your diadem, mace and discus glowing on all sides, possessing a mass of energy, and being subdued with the effulgence of the blazing fire of the sun.

त्वमक्षरं परमं वेदितव्यं त्वमस्य विश्वस्य परं निधानम्। त्वमव्ययः शाश्वतधर्मगोप्ता सनातनस्त्वं पुरुषो मतो मे
You are imperishable and the Supreme object of this universe. You are undecaying and the guardian of everlasting virtue. I find you the eternal great Being.

अनादिमध्यान्तमनन्तवीर्य मनन्तबाहुं शशिसूर्यनेत्रम्। पश्यामि त्वां दीप्तहुताशवक्त्रं स्वतेजसा विश्वमिदं तपन्तम्
I behold you without beginning, middle and end. I behold you possessing infinite prowess and innumerable arms, having the sun and the moon as your two eyes, and the blazing fire as your mouth; I behold you heating the universe with your own great energy.

द्यावापृथिव्योरिदमन्तरं हि व्याप्तं त्वयैकेन दिशश्च सर्वाः। दृष्ट्वाद्भुतं रूपमुग्रं तवेदं लोकत्रयं प्रव्यथितं महात्मन्
The space between heaven and earth and all the points of the horizon are pervaded by you alone. The three worlds tremble, O supreme Self, at the sight of your this marvelous and fierce form.

अमी हि त्वां सुरसंघा विशन्ति केचिद् भीताः प्राञ्जलयो गृणन्ति। स्वस्तीत्युक्त्वा महर्षिसिद्धसंघाः स्तुवन्ति त्वां स्तुतिभिः पुष्कलाभिः
Hosts of celestial enter into you, some perhaps being afraid pray with joined hands, saying Hail to thee. Hosts of great Rishis and Siddhyas praise you with innumerable hymns of praise.

रुद्रादित्या वसवो ये च साध्या विश्वेऽश्विनौ मरुतश्चोष्मपाश्च। गन्धर्वयक्षासुरसिद्धसंघा वीक्षन्ते त्वां विस्मिताश्चैव सर्वे
The Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Visvas, the Ashvins, the Maruts, the Ushmapas, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Asuras, and hosts of Siddhyas see you; and they are all amazed.

रूपं महत् ते बहुवक्त्रनेत्रं महाबाहो बहुबाहुरुपादम्। बहूदरं बहुदंष्ट्राकरालं दृष्ट्वा लोकाः परव्यथितास्तथाऽहम्
O mighty-armed, all creatures frightened, and I am seeing also your mighty form with many mouths and eyes, with innumerable arms, things, feet and bellies, and terrible on account of many tusks.

नभःस्पृशं दीप्तमनेकवर्ण व्यात्ताननं दीप्तविशालनेत्रम्। दृष्ट्वा हि त्वां प्रव्यथितान्तरात्मा धृति न विन्दामि शमं च विष्णो
I can no longer command courage or enjoy peace of mind, seeing your mighty forin which are is touching the very skies, which is fiery radiant, many winged, widely open mouthed and with large and blazing eyes.

दंष्ट्राकरालानि च ते मुखानि दृष्ट्वैव कालनलसंनिभानि। दिशो न जाने न लभे च शर्म प्रसीद देवेश जगन्निवास
Seeing your mouth terrible with tusks and fearful as the all-destroying Fire at the final end of the Yuga, I cannot recognize the points of the horizon or command my peace of mind.

अमी च त्वां धृतराष्ट्रस्य पुत्राः सर्वे सहैवावनिपालसंधैः। भीष्मो द्रोणः सूतपुत्रस्तथासौ सहास्मदीयैरपि योधमुख्यैः
All the son of Dhritarashtra, together with the host of kings, Bhishma Drona and Suta's son, Karna, with even the principle warriors of our side.

वक्त्राणि ते त्वरमाणा विशन्ति दंष्ट्राकरालानि भयानकानि। केचिद् विलग्ना दशनान्तरेषु संदृश्यन्ते चूर्णितैरुत्तमाङ्गैः
Are quickly entering your terrible mouths, rendered more terrible by they tusks. Some, with their heads crushed, stick at the interstices of your teeth

यथा नदीनां बहवोऽम्बुवेगाः समुद्रमेवाभिमुखा द्रवन्ति। तथा तवामी नरलोकवीरा विशन्ति वक्त्राण्यभिविज्वलन्ति
As many currents of waters, flowing through different channels, roll rapidly into the ocean, so these heroes of the world enter into your blazing mouth.

यथा प्रदीप्तं ज्वलनं पतङ्गा विशन्ति नाशाय समृद्धवेगाः। स्तवापि वक्त्राणि समृद्धवेगाः
As insects for their own destruction rush in increasing speed into the blazing fire, so these men, with unceasing speed enter into your mouth for their own destruction.

ल्लोकान् समग्रान् वदनैर्व्वलदिः। तेजोभिरापूर्यं जगत् समग्रं भासस्तवोचाः प्रतपन्ति विष्णो
Devouring all these men from every side, you lick them with your flaming mouths. O Vishnu, your fcarful splendor, filling the whole universe with your great energy, heat everything.

आख्याहि मे को भवानुग्ररूपो नमोऽस्तु ते देववर प्रसीद। विज्ञातुमिच्छामि भवन्तमाद्यं न हि प्रजानामि तव प्रवृत्तिम्
Tell me who are you with this fearful form. I bow down my head to you; be gracious to me, O chief of the gods. I desire to know you, Primeval One; for I do not understand your actions.

श्रीभगवानुवाच कालोऽस्मि लोकक्षयकृत्प्रवृद्धो लोकान् समाहर्तुमिह प्रवृत्तः। ऋतेऽपि त्वां न भविष्यन्ति सर्वे येऽवस्थिताः प्रत्यनीकेषु योधाः।।३२
The Great One said I am (now) the full manifestation of Death, the Destroyer of the worlds. All these warriors, standing in different divisions, will cease to be, even if you do not kill them.

तस्मात् त्वमुत्तिष्ठ यशो लभस्व जित्वाशत्रून् भुइक्ष्व राज्यं समृद्धम्। मयैवैते निहताः पूर्वमेव निमित्तमात्रं भव सव्यसाचिन्
Therefore, arise and gain glory Vanquishing the foe, enjoy this great kingdom. All these men are already slain by me. Be my instrument only.

द्रोणं च भीष्मं च जयद्रथं च कर्णं तथान्यानपि योधवीरान्। मया हतांस्त्वं जहि मा व्यथिष्ठा युध्यस्व तेजासि रणे सपत्नान्।।३४
Kill Drona, Bhishma, Jayadratha, Karna and all these brave warriors, they are already killed by me. Do not be dismayed. Fight, you will conquer your foes in battle.

संजय उवाच एतच्छ्रुत्वा वचनं केशवस्य कृताञ्जलिर्वेपमानः किरीटी। मनस्कृत्वा भूय एवाह कृष्णं सगद्गद भीतभीतः प्रणम्य
Sanjaya said Hearing these words the diadem decked Arjuna, trembling, and with joined hands, bowed to Krishna. Making his salutations, overwhelmed with fear, he once more with choked voice said to him.

अर्जुन उवाच स्थाने हृषीकेश तव प्रकीर्त्या जगत् प्रहष्यत्यनुरज्यते च। रक्षांसि भीतानि दिशो द्रवन्ति सर्वे नमस्यन्ति च सिद्धसंघा:
Arjuna said It is quite natural, O Hrishikesha, that the universe is delighted and charmed in singing your praise, and Rakshasas are scattered away in fear and hosts of Siddhyas are bowing (at your feet).

कस्माच्च ते न नमेरन् महात्मन् गरीयसे ब्रह्मणोऽप्यादिकत्रै। अनन्त देवेश जगन्निवास त्वमक्षरं सदसत्तत्परं यत्
And why should they not bow down to you, O Supreme Self, for you are greater than Brahma, you are the primal Cause. O Infinite One, O God of the gods, O Refuge of the universe, you are indestructible, you are that which is and that which is not, and that which is beyond both the existent and non-existence.

स्त्वमस्य विश्वस्य परं निधानम्। वेत्तासि वेद्यं च परं च धाम त्वया ततं विश्वमनन्तरूप
You are the First God, the Ancient Being; you are the Supreme Refuge of the world. You are the Knower and the Object to be known; you are the highest abode. O Infinite One, the whole universe is pervaded by you.

वायुर्यमोऽग्निर्वरुणः शशाङ्कः प्रजापतिस्त्वं प्रपितामहश्च। नमो नमस्तेऽस्तु सहस्रकृत्व: पुनश्च भूयोऽपि नमो नमस्ते
You are Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, Chandra, Prajapati and Grandsire. I bow down my head to you a thousand times. Again and yet again I bow down my head to you.

नमः पुरस्तादथ पृष्ठतस्ते नमोऽस्तु ते सर्वत एव सर्व। अनन्तवीर्यामितविक्रमस्त्वं सर्वं समाप्नोषि ततोऽसि सर्वः
My salutation to you in front; my salutation to your from behind. O you All, my salutation to you from every side. You are all, your cnergy infinite, your prowess immeasurable; you embrace all.

सखेति मत्वा प्रसभं यदुक्तं हे कृष्ण हे यादव हे सखेति। अजानता महिमानं तवेदं मया प्रमादात् प्रणयेन वाऽपि यच्चावहासार्थमसत्कृतोऽसि विहारशय्यासनभोजनेषु। एकोऽथवाऽप्यच्युत तत्समक्षं तत् क्षामये त्वामहमप्रमेयम्
O Krishna, O Yadava, O friend, O undecaying One, O Infinite one, I beg your pardon for whatever has been said carelessly by me, and whatever disrespect has been shown to you not knowing your greatness, and considering you friend from want of judgment or from love, either out of mirth or on occasions of play lying, sitting or at meals, while alone or in the presence of others.

पितासि लोकस्य चराचरस्य त्वमस्य पूज्यश्च गुरुर्गरीयान्। न त्वत्समोऽस्त्यभ्यधिकः कुतोऽन्यो लोकत्रयेऽप्यप्रतिमप्रभाव
You are the Father of the universe, of movable and immovable; you are the great Master deserving of all worship. There is none equal to you. How can there be one greater than you whose power is matchless in these worlds.

तस्मात् प्रणम्य प्रणिधाय कायं प्रसादये त्वामहमीशमीड्यम्। पितेव पुत्रस्य सखेव सख्युः प्रियः प्रियायार्हसि देव सोढुम्
Therefore, O Lord, O adorable One, bowing to you, prostrating before you, I ask your grace. You should overlook my faults, O God,, as father does his son's a friend his friend's a lover his lover's.

अदृष्टपूर्वं हृषीतोऽस्मि दृष्ट्वा भयेन च प्रव्यथितं मनो मे। तदेव मे दर्शय देवरूपं प्रसीद देवेश जगनिवास
Seeing your this form unseen before, I have been delighted, but my mind has been frightened. Show me your ordinary form. O God. Be gracious, O Lord of the gods, O Refuge of the universe

मिच्छामि त्वां द्रष्टुमहं तथैव। तेनैव रूपेण चतुर्भुजेन सहस्रवाहो भव विश्वमूर्ते
I desire to see you as before, with diadem, discus and mace. O you of thousand arms, O you of universal form, be of that four armed form.

श्रीभगवानुवाच मया प्रसन्नेन तवार्जुनेदं रूपं परं दर्शितमात्मयोगात्। तेजोमयं विश्वमनन्तमाद्यं यन्मे त्वदन्येन न दृष्टपूर्वम्
The great One said Being pleased with you, O Arjuna, I have by my mystic powers, shown to you this my Supreme form, glorious, universal, infinite and Primeval, which has been seen by none before, except now by you.

न च क्रियाभिर्न तपोभिरुयैः एवंरूपः शक्य अहं नृलोके द्रष्टुं त्वदन्येन कुरुप्रवीर
Except by you only, O Kuru warrior, I cannot be seen in this form by any one in this word, not even by the study of the Vedas, or by sacrifices, gifts, actions or severest penances.

मा ते व्यथा मा च विमूढभावो दृष्ट्वा रूपं घोरमीदृङ्ममेदम्। व्यपेतभी: प्रीतमनाः पुनस्त्वं तदेव मे रूपमिदं प्रपश्य
Have no fear or perplexity of mind at seeing my this fearful form. Freed from fear, with a joyful heart, behold my other form.

संजय उवाच इत्यर्जुनं वासुदेवस्तथोक्त्वा स्वकं रूपं दर्शयामास भूयः। आश्वासयामास च भीतमेनं भूत्वा पुनः सौम्यवपुर्महात्मा
Sanjaya said Having said all this to Arjuna, Vasudeva once more showed him his own ordinary form. The high-souled One, once more assuming his gentle form, comforted Arjuna who was much agitated.

अर्जुन उवाच दृष्ट्वेदं मानुषं रूपं तव सौम्यं जनार्दन। इदानीमस्मि संवृत्तः सचेताः प्रकृतिं गतः
Arjuna said Seeing your this gentle human form, o Janardana, I have come to my right mind and to my normal state.

श्रीभगवानुवाच सुदुर्दर्शमिदं रूपं दृष्टवानसि यन्मम। देवा अप्यस्य रूपस्य नित्यं दर्शनकाक्षिणः
The great one said 'The form of mine, which you have (just now) seen, is difficult to be seen. Even the celestial are always eager to see my this great form.

नाहं वेदैर्न तपसा न दानेन न चेज्यया। शक्य एवंविधो दुष्टुं दृष्टवानसि मां यथा।
Not by the study of the Vedas, not by penances, gifts or sacrifices, can I be seen in this form of mine which you have seen.

भक्त्या त्वनन्यया शक्य अहमेवंविधोऽर्जुन। ज्ञातुं द्रष्टुं च तत्त्वेन प्रवेष्टुं च परंतप
But by exclusive devotion to me, O Arjuna, O chastiser of foes, I can, in this form, be known, truly seen and attained to.

मत्कर्मकृन्मत्परमो मद्भक्तः सङ्गवर्जितः। निर्वैरः सर्वभूतेषु यः स मामेति पाण्डव
O Arjuna, he who does everything for Me, who has only Me for his supreme objects, who has only Me for his supreme objects, who is freed from all attachments and who is without enmity towards any beings, comes to Me.

अर्जुन उवाच एवं सततयुक्ता ये भक्तास्त्वां पर्युपासते। ये चाप्यक्षरमव्यक्तं तेषां के योगवित्तमाः
Arjuna said Of those worshipers, who constantly adore you and who mediate on you as Imperishable and Unmanifest, who are the best acquainted with devotion?

श्रीभगवानुवाच मय्यावेश्य मनो ये मां नित्ययुक्ता उपासते। श्रद्धया परयोपेतास्ते मे युक्ततमा मताः
The great One said Those that constantly adore me, fixing their minds on me, and being endued with the highest faith, are considered by me as men having the greatest devotion.

ये त्वक्षरमनिर्देश्यमव्यक्तं पर्युपासते। सर्वत्रगमचिन्त्यं च कूटस्थमचलं ध्रुवम्
Those, however, who worship the Imperishable, the All pervading, Inconceivable, the Indifferent, the Immutable, the Eternal.

संनियम्येन्द्रियग्रामं सर्वत्रं समबुद्धयः। ते प्राप्नुवन्ति मामेव सर्वभूतहिते रताः
Who, restraining the entire groups of senses, are equal-minded in respect of all things, and are engaged in doing good to all creature, come to Me.

क्लेशोऽधिकतरस्तेषामव्यक्तासक्तचेतसाम्। अव्यक्ता हि गतिर्दुःखं देहवद्भिरवाप्यते
Difficulty to attain me is greater to those who seek for the Unmanifest, for, the way to the Unmanifest is hard to find by man.

ये त सर्वाणि कर्माणि मयि संन्यस्य मत्पराः। अनन्येनैव योगेन मां ध्यायन्त उपासते तेषामहं समुद्धर्ता मृत्युसंसारसागरात्। भवामि नचिरात् पार्थ मय्यावेशितचेतसाम्
I, without delay, become deliver from the ocean of this world of those, who, reposing all actions on Me and considering Me the highest object of attainment, worship Me, mediating on Me with exclusive devotion, and fixing their minds on Me.

मय्येव मन आधत्स्व मयि बुद्धिं निवेशय। निवसिष्यसि मय्येव अत अर्ध्वं न संशयः
Fix your mind on Me alone, place your understanding also on Me, you will thus, after death, live in Me; there is not the least doubt in it.

अथ चित्तं समाधातुं न शक्नोषि मयि स्थिरम्। अभ्यासयोगेन ततो मामिच्छाप्तुं धनंजय
If, however, O Dhananjaya, you are unable thus to fix your mind on Me, then, try to obtain Me by devotion arising from continued application.

अभ्यासेऽप्यसमर्थोऽसि मत्कर्मपरमो भव। मदर्थमपि कर्माणि कुर्वन् सिद्धिमवाप्स्यसि
If you are not able even to have continued application, let your actions be performed for Me with your highest aim. For, by performing acts for My sake, you will attain to perfection.

अथैतदप्यशक्तोऽसि कर्तुं मद्योगमाश्रितः। सर्वकर्मफलत्यागं ततः कुरु यतात्मवान्
If even this you are unable to do, then resort to devotion in Me. Subduing your Self, abandon the desire for the fruits of actions.

श्रेयो हि ज्ञानमभ्यासाज्ज्ञानाद् ध्यानं विशिष्यते। ध्यानात् कर्मफलत्यागस्त्यागाच्छान्तिरनन्तरम्
Knowledge is superior to application; mediation is better than knowledge; abandonment of the desire for the fruits of action is better than mediation; place is the immediate result of such abandonment.

अद्वेष्टा सर्वभूतानां मैत्रः करुण एव च। निर्ममो निरहंकारः समदुःखसुखः क्षमी संतुष्टः सतत योगी यतात्मा दृढनिश्चयः। मय्यर्पितमनोबुद्धिर्यो मद्भक्तः स मे प्रियः
He is dear to Me who has no hatred for anything, who is friendly and compassionate, who is free from egoism, who has no vanity, who is alike in pleasure and pain, who is forgiving, contented, always devoted, whose self is subdued, purpose is firm, mind and understanding are fixed on Me.

यस्मान्नोद्विजते लोको लोकान्नोद्विजते च यः। हर्षामर्षभयोद्वेगैर्मुक्तो यः स च मे प्रियः
He is dear to Me, who is not troubled by the world, and the world is not troubled by him; and who is free from joy, fear and anxieties.

अनपेक्षः शुचिर्दक्ष उदासीनो गतव्यथः। सर्वारम्भपरित्यागी यो मद्भक्तः स मे प्रियः
He is dear to Me who is pure, diligent, unconcerned, and free from all distress, and desireless for the fruits of actions.

यो न हृष्यति न द्वेष्टि न शोचति न काङ्क्षति। शुभाशुभपरित्यागी भक्तिमान् यः स मे प्रियः।।१७।
He is dear to Me who has no joy and no aversion, who neither grieves nor desire, who renounces both good and evil and who is full of faith in Me.

समः शत्रौ च मित्रे च तथा मानापमानयोः। शीतोष्णमुखदुःखेषु समः सङ्गविवर्जितः
He is dear to Me who is alike to friend and foc, in honour and dishonor, in cold and heat, in pleasure and pain, and who is free from attachments.

तुल्यनिन्दास्तुतिौनी संतुष्टो येन केनचित्। अनिकेत: स्थिरमतिर्भक्तिमान् मे प्रियो नरः
He is dear to Me who is taciturn, who is contented with anything that come to him, who is homeless, steady-minded, full of faith, and to whom censure and praise are the same.

ये तु धर्मामृतमिदं यथोक्तं पर्युपासते। श्रद्दधाना मत्परमा भक्तास्तेऽतीव मे प्रियाः
Those who resort to this righteousness that leads to immortality, and which has been declared to you by Me, such devotees of faith, who regard Me as the highest object for attainment, are the most dear to Me".

श्रीभगवानुवाच इदं शरीरं कौन्तेय क्षेत्रमित्यभिधीयते। एतद् यो वेत्ति तं प्राहुः क्षेत्रज्ञ इति तद्विदः
The great One said This body, O son of Kunti, is called Kshetra. The learned call him who knows it, Kshetrajna.

क्षेत्रज्ञं चापि मां विद्धि सर्वक्षेत्रेषु भारत। क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञयोर्ज्ञानं यत् तज्ज्ञानं मतं मम
Know me, O Bharata. as Kshetrajna in all Kshetras. I consider the knowledge of Kshetra and Kshetrajna to be the true knowledge.

तत् क्षेत्रं यच्च यादृक् च यद्विकारि यतश्च यत्। स च यो यत्प्रभावश्च तत् समासेन मे शृणु
Hear from Me in brief what is Kshetra what it is like, what changes it undergoes, and whence it comes. Know also what is Kshetrajna, and what are his powers.

ऋषिभिर्बहुधा गीतं छन्दोभिर्विविधैः पृथक्। ब्रह्मसूत्रपदैश्चैव हेतुमद्भिर्विनिश्चितैः
All this his, in many ways, been sung by many Rishis in various verses and well settled texts, full of reason and indicating Brahma.

महाभूतान्यहंकारो वुद्धिरव्यक्तमेव च। इन्द्रियाणि दशैकं च पञ्च चेन्द्रियगोचराः
The elements, egoism, intellect, Nature, ten senses, the mind, the five objects of senses.

इच्छा द्वेषः सुखं दुःखं संघातश्चेतना धृतिः। एतत् क्षेत्रं समासेन सविकारमुदाहृतम्
Desire, aversion, pleasure, pain, body consciousness, courage, all these five have been declared to be Kshetra in its modified form.

अमानित्वमदम्भित्वमहिमा शान्तिरार्जवम्। आचार्योपासनं शौचं स्थैर्यमात्मविनिग्रहः इन्द्रियार्थेषु वैराग्यमनहंकार एव च। जन्ममृत्युजराव्याधिदुःखदोषानुदर्शनम्
Purity, constancy, self-restraint, forgiveness, uprightness, absence of vanity, ostentation and egoism, abstention from fear, indifference to objects of senses, perception of misery and evil of birth, death decrepitude and disease.

असक्तिरनभिष्वङ्गः पुत्रदारगृहादिषु। नित्यं च समचित्तत्वमिष्टानिष्टोपपत्तिषु
Freedom from attachinent, absence of love for son, wife, home and the rest and constant equanimity of heart in good and evil.

मयि चानन्ययोगेन भक्तिरव्यभिचारिणी। विविक्तदेशसेवित्वमरतिर्जनसंसदि
Unswerving devotion to Me without mediation on anything else, frequenting of lonely places and hatred for concourse of men.

अध्यात्मज्ञाननित्यत्वं तत्त्वज्ञानार्थदर्शनम्। एतज्ज्ञानमिति प्रोक्तमज्ञानं यदतोऽन्यथा
The firin knowledge of the relation between the great Self and the Individual Self, perception of the object of true knowledge, all this is called knowledge; and all that is contrary to this is called Ignorance.

ज्ञेयं यत् तत् प्रवक्ष्यामि यज्ज्ञात्वागऽमृतमश्नुते। अनादिमत् परं ब्रह्म न सत् तन्नासदुच्यते
I shall now declare to you that which is the object of knowledge, and knowing which one obtains immortality. It is the Supreme Brahma, having no beginning, and who is neither existent nor non-existent.

सर्वतः पाणिपादं तत् सर्वतोऽक्षिशिरोमुखम्। सर्वतःश्रुतिमल्लोके सर्वमावृत्य तिष्ठति
(It is the Supreme Brahma) whose hands and feet are on all sides, whose eyes, heads and faces, are on all sides, who hears on all sides, who dwells pervading all in this world;

सर्वेन्द्रियगुणाभासं सर्वेन्द्रियविवर्जितम्। असक्तं सर्वभृच्चैव निर्गुणं गुणभोक्त च
Who, being devoid of the senses, is possessed of all the qualities of the senses, who sustains all things but has no attachment for any thing, who having no attributes, possesses all attributes,

बहिरन्तश्च भूतानामचरं चरमेव च। सूक्ष्मत्वात् तद् विज्ञेयं दूरस्थं चान्तिके च तत्
Who is within and without all creatures, immobile and mobile, who is not knowable, on account of his subtiety, who is remote yet near;

अविभक्तं च भूतेषु विभक्तमिव च स्थितम्। भूतभर्तृ च तज्ज्ञेयं चसिष्णु प्रभविष्णु च
Who, being undistributed in any thing, remain as if distributed in every thing; who is the sustainer of all beings, and the destroyer and the creator of all;

ज्योतिषामपि तज्ज्योतिस्तमसः परमुच्यते। ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं ज्ञानगम्यं हृदि सर्वस्य धिष्ठितम्
Who is the light of all luminous bodies, who is beyond all darkness; who is knowledge, the object of knowledge and the end of knowledge; who is seated in the hearts of all.

इति क्षेत्रं तथा ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं चोक्तं समासतः। मद्भक्त एतद् विज्ञाय मद्भावायोपपद्यते
Thus in brief Kshetra, Knowledge, and the object of knowledge are declared to you. Knowing all this, O my friend and devotee, attain to yoga (assimilation with Me).

प्रकृति पुरुषं चैव विद्ध्यनादी उभावपि। विकारांश्च गुणांश्चैव विद्धि प्रकृतिसम्भवान्।
Know that Prakriti and Purusha are both without beginnings; and know all modifications (of matter) and all qualities (pleasures and pain &c.) spring from Prakriti (Nature).

कार्यकरणकर्तृत्वे हेतुः प्रकृतिरुच्यते। पुरुषः सुखदुःखानां भोक्तृत्वे हेतुरुच्यते
Prakriti is the source of the workings of cases and effects. Prakriti is the source of the capacity of enjoying pleasures and pains.

पुरुषः प्रकृतिस्थो हि भुङ्क्ते प्रकृतिजान् गुणान्। कारणं गुणसङ्गोऽस्य सदसद्योनिजन्मसु
Self, dwelling in Nature (having a material body), enjoys the qualities that are born in Nature. The cause of the birth in good or in evil works is its connection with such qualities.

उपद्रष्टानुमन्ता च भर्ता भोक्ता महेश्वरः। परमात्मेति चाप्युक्तो देहेऽस्मिन् पुरुषः परः
The supreme Purusha in then (human) body is the surveyor, adviser, supporter, and enjoyer; he is the mighty Lord and Supreme Self.

य एवं वेत्ति पुरुषं प्रकृतिं च गुणैः सह। सर्वथा वर्तमानोऽपि न स भूयोऽभिजायते
He who thus knows Prakriti and Purusha with the qualities, in whatever state he may be, is never born again.

ध्यानेनात्मनि पश्यन्ति केचिदात्मानमात्मना। अन्ये सांख्येन योगेन कर्मयोगेन चापरे
Some by mediation see the Self in his(own) self by (his own)self by (his own) Self. Some again(see) by Sankhya Yoga and some again by Karma Yoga.

अन्ये त्वेवमजानन्तः श्रुत्वाऽन्येभ्य उपासते। तेऽपि चातितरन्त्येव मृत्यु श्रुतिपरायणाः
Others again worship Him, hearing of Him from others, although they do not know this (Mystery of Yoga). Even these men, if devoted to what is heard of the true Knowledge, pass over death, (and attain to final emancipation).

यावत् संजायते किंचित् सत्त्वं स्थावटजङ्गमम्। क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञसंयोगात् तद् विद्धि भरतर्षभ
O best of the Bharata race, know whatever entity, movable and immovable comes into existence, it is out of the connection of Kshetra and Kshetrajna.

समं सर्वेषु भूतेषु तिष्ठन्तं परमेश्वरम्। विनश्यत्स्वविनश्यन्तं यः पश्यति स पश्यति
He sees truly who sees the supreme Lord alike in all beings and who sees the Imperishable in the perishable.

सं पश्यन् हि सर्वत्र समवस्थितमीश्वरम्। न हिनस्त्यात्मनाऽऽत्मानं ततो याति परां गतिम्
For he who sees the Great Lord dwelling alike in every thing and every where, does not destroy himself by himself and thus reaches the highest goal.

प्रकृत्यैव च कर्माणि क्रियमाणानि सर्वशः। यः पश्यति तथाऽऽत्मानमकर्तारं स पश्यति
He sees truly who sees all actions worked by Nature alone, and self not to be the doer.

यदा भूतपृथग्भावमेकस्थमनुपश्यति। तत एव च विस्तारं ब्रह्म सम्पद्यते तदा।
When one sees the various entities existing in One, and the birth of every thing from that one, he is then said to attain to Brahma.

अनादित्वान्निर्गुणत्वात् परमात्माऽयमव्ययः। शरीरस्थोऽपि कौन्तेय न करोति न लिप्यते
This inexhaustible Supreme Self, O son of Kunti, without having beginning and without having attributes, does not act at all. It is in no way stained, even when it remains in (human body).

यथा सर्वगतं सौक्ष्मयादाकाशं नोपलिप्यते। सर्वत्रावस्थितो देहे तथाऽऽत्मा नोपलिप्यते
As space for its subtility and as it is ubiquitous is never tainted, so Self stationed in every body, is never tainted.

यथा प्रकाशयत्येकः कृत्स्नं लोकमिमं रविः। क्षेत्रं क्षेत्री तथा कृत्स्नं प्रकाशयति भारत
As the single sun, O Bharata, lights up all this entire world, so Purusha lights up the entire sphere of matters.

क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञयोरेवमन्तरं ज्ञानचक्षुषा। भूतप्रकृतिमोक्षं च ये विदुर्यान्ति ते परम्
Those who, by the eye of knowledge, know the distinction between Prakriti and Purusha, and the release from the nature of all entities, attain to the Supreme.

श्रीभगवानुवाच परं भूयः प्रवक्ष्यामि ज्ञानानां ज्ञानमुत्तमम्। यज्ज्ञात्वा मुनयः सर्वे परां सिद्धिमितो गताः
The Great one said “I shall again speak to you that great Science of all Sciences, that excellent Science, knowing which all the Rishis have attained to the highest (and final) emancipation from this body.

इदं ज्ञानमुपाश्रित्य मम साधर्म्यमागताः। सर्गेऽपि नोपजायन्ते प्रलये न व्यथन्ति च।
Resorting to this great Science, and thus attaining to My Nature, men have no more rebirths, not even at the time of a new Creation. They are not disturbed even at the dissolution of the universe.

मम योनिर्महद् ब्रह्म तस्मिन् गर्भं दधाम्हम्। सम्भवः सर्वभूतानां ततो भवति भारत
The Great Brahma is the womb in which I place the germ. Thence, O Bharata, take place the births of all beings.

सर्वयोनिषु कौन्तेय मूर्तयः सम्भवन्ति याः। तासां ब्रह्म महद्योनिरहं बीजप्रदः पिता
Whatever is born, O son of Kunti, of them is Brahma the womb, and I the seed-imparting Sire.

सत्त्वं रजस्तम इति गुणाः प्रकृतिसम्भवाः। निबन्धन्ति महाबाहो देहे देहिनमव्ययम्
Sattva, Raja and Tama, these three qualities of Nature, O mighty-armed, bind down the Eternal Self in the body of beings.

तत्र सत्त्वं निर्मलत्वात् प्रकाशकमनायम्। सुखसङ्गेन बध्नाति ज्ञानसङ्गेन चानघ
Amongst the three, Sattva from its untainted nature, from its being enlightening, and as it is free from misery, keeps the Self bound with the attachment of happiness and knowledge.

रजो रागात्मकं विद्धि तृष्णासङ्गसमुद्भवम्। तन्निबध्नाति कौन्तेय कर्मसङ्गेन देहिनम्
Raja, having desire for its essence, is born of thirst and attachment; therefore, O son of Kunti, it binds the embodied Self with the attachment of work.

तमस्त्वज्ञानजं विद्धि मोहनं सर्वदेहिनाम्। प्रमादालस्यनिद्राभिस्तन्निबध्नाति भारत।
Tama is born of ignorance, and therefore it deludes all embodied selves. O Bharata, it binds the Self with error, indolence, and sleep.

सत्त्वं सुखे संजयति रजः कर्मणि भारत। ज्ञानमावृत्य तु तमः प्रमादे संजयत्युत
Sattva unites the Self with pleasure, Raja, with work; but O Bharata, Tama, shadowing knowledge, binds Self with error.

रजस्तमश्चाभिभूय सत्त्वं भवति भारत। रजः सत्त्व तमश्चैव तमः सत्त्वं रजस्तथा।
Sattva remains if Raja and Tama are repressed. Tame remains if Sattva and Raja are repressed' and, Oh Bharata, Raja remains if Tama and Sattva are repressed.

सर्वद्वारेषु देहेऽस्मिन् प्रकाश उपजायते। ज्ञानं यदा तदा विद्याद् विवृद्धं सत्त्वमित्युत
When in this body knowledge pervades all, then should one know that Sattva has been developed.

लोभः प्रवृत्तिरारम्भः कर्मणामशमः स्पृहा। रजस्येतानि जायन्ते विवृद्धे भरतर्षभ
When, O chief of Bharata's race, avarice, activity, fondness of works, want of tranquility, and desire, are born in this body, then should one know that Raja has been developed.

अप्रकाशोऽप्रवृत्तिश्च प्रमादो मोह एव च। तमस्येतानि जायन्ते विवृद्धे कुरुनन्दन
When, O son of the Kuru race gloom, inactivity, error, and delusion, are born in this body, then should one know that Tama has been developed.

यदा सत्त्वे प्रवृद्धे तु प्रलयं याति देहभृत्। तदोत्तमविदां लोकानमलान् प्रतिपद्यते
When a man dies when his Sattva is developed, he goes to the sinless region of those that know the supreme.

रजसि प्रलयं गत्वा कर्मसङ्गिषु जायते। तथा प्रलीनस्तमसि मूढयोनिषु जायते
Dying, when Raja prevails, he goes among those who are attached to works. Dying in Tama he is born in the womb that produces ignorant men.

कर्मणः सुकृतस्याहुः सात्त्विकं निर्मलं फलम्। रजसस्तु फलंदुःखमज्ञानं तमसः फलम्
The fruit of Sattva is good and untainted; the fruit of Raja is misery, and that of Tama is ignorance.

सत्त्वात् संजायते ज्ञानं रजसो लोभ एव च। प्रमादमोहौ तमसो भवतोऽज्ञानमेव च
From Sattva is produced knowledge from Raja avarice, and from Tama error, delusion and ignorance.

ऊर्ध्वगच्छन्ति सत्त्वस्था मध्ये तिष्ठन्ति राजसाः। जघन्यगुणवृत्तिस्था अधो गच्छन्ति तामसाः
Those that live in Sattva go on high those that are addicted to Raja live in the middle; and those that are of Tama, having the lowest quality, go down.

नान्यं गुणेभ्यः कर्तारं यदा द्रष्टानुपश्यति। गुणेभ्यश्च परं वेत्ति मद्भावं सोऽधिगच्छति
When an observing man comes to know these three qualities to be the only agents of all works, and recognize him who is beyond all qualities, he then attains to My Nature.

गुणानेतानतीत्य त्रीन् देही देहसमुद्भवान्। जन्ममृत्युजरादुःखैर्विमुक्तोऽमृतमश्नुते
The embodied self (man) by transcending three qualities, which are the source of all bodies, attains immortality, being freed from birth, death, old age, decay and misery."

अर्जुन उवाच कैर्लिङ्गैस्त्रीन् गुणानेतानतीतो भवति प्रभो। किमाचारः कथं चैतांस्त्रीन् गुणानतिवर्तते
Arjuna said What are the characteristic, O Lord, of that man who has transcended the three qualities? What is his conduct? How can a man transcend these three qualities?

श्रीभगवानुवाच प्रकाश: च प्रवृत्तिं च मोहमेव च पाण्डव। न द्वेष्टि सम्प्रवृत्तानि न निवृत्तानि काङ्क्षति
The great One said He who has no aversion for knowledge, work or ignorance (the results of the three qualities) when they are present, and he who does not desire them when they are absent, has transcended the three qualities.

उदासीनवदासीनो गुणैर्यो न विचाल्यते। गुणा वर्तन्त इत्येव योऽवतिष्ठति नेङ्गते
He, who remains all unconcerned, being not shaken by the three qualities who sits and moves not, thinking that it is the qualities and not he, who is engaged in their functions, has transcended the three qualities.

समदुःखसुखः स्वस्थः समलोष्टाश्मकाञ्चनः। तुल्यप्रियाप्रियोधीरस्तुल्यनिन्दाऽऽत्मसंस्तुति
He, to whom pain and pleasure are alike who is self-restrained, to whom a sod of earth, a stone, a piece of gold, are all alike; to whom agreeable and the disagreeable are the same, to whom praise and censure are alike, has transcended the three qualities.

मानापमानयोस्तुल्यस्तुल्यो मित्रारिपक्षयोः। सर्वारम्भपरित्यागी गुणातीतः स उच्यते
He, to whom honour and dishonour are same, to whom friends and foes are alike; who has discernment, and who has renounced all self-exertion, has transcended the three qualities.

मां च योऽव्यभिचारेण भक्तियोगेन सेवते। स गुणान् समतीत्यैतान् ब्रह्मभूयाय कल्पते
He who worships Me with exclusive devotion, transcends the three qualities and becomes fit for admission into the nature of Brahma.

ब्रह्मणो हि प्रतिष्ठाहममृतस्याव्यस्य च। शाश्वतस्य च धर्मस्य सुखस्यैकान्तिकस्य च
For, I am the embodiment of Brahma, of immortality, of imperishability, of eternal piety and ever-continuing felicity.

श्रीभगवानुवाच ऊर्ध्वमूलमधःशाखमश्वत्थं प्राहुरव्ययम्। छन्दांसि यस्य पर्णानि यस्तं वेद स वेदवित्
The great One said They say that the Ahsvatha tree with its roots above and branches below is (like the) eternal. Its leaves are the Chandas. He who knows it knows the Vedas.

अधश्चोर्ध्वं प्रसृतास्तस्य शाखा गुणप्रवृद्धा विषयप्रवालाः। अधश्च मूलान्यनुसंततानि कर्मानुबन्धीनि मनुष्यलोके
Its branches which are enlarged by the qualities stretched upwards and downwards; its sprouts are the objects of senses. Its roots, leading to actions, are extended downward to this world of men.

न रूपमस्येह तथोपलभ्यते नान्तो न चादिर्न च सम्प्रतिष्ठा। मसङ्गशस्त्रेण दृढेन छित्त्वा ततः पदं तत् परिमार्गितव्यं यस्मिन् गता न निवर्तन्ति भूयः। तमेव चाद्यं पुरुषं प्रपद्ये यतः प्रवृत्तिः प्रसृता पुराणी
Its from cannot be known in this world, nor its end, its beginning, for its support. Cutting this Ahsvatha of strong roots with a sharp weapon, one should seek for that place going whither none returns again-resolving, “I shall seek the protection of that Primeval Sire from whom the original course of this worldly life has flowed.

निर्मानमोहा जितसङ्गदोषा अध्यात्मनित्या विनिवृत्तकामाः। गच्छन्त्यमूढाः पदमव्ययं तत्
Those that are free from delusion and pride, that have subdued the evil of attachments, that are steady in contemplation of the relation of the Supreme to the individual Self, from whom desires have gone away, and who is free from the pairs of opposites, go undeluded to that eternal seat.

न तद् भासयते सूर्यो न शशाङ्को न पावकः। यद् गत्वा न निवर्तन्ते तद् धाम परमं मम
The sun lights not that place, nor the Moon, nor the fire. Going there none returns, that is my Supreme seat.

ममैवांशो जीवलोके जीवभूतः सनातनः। मनः षष्ठानीन्द्रीयाणि प्रकृतिस्थानि कर्षति
An everlasting portion of Me (My Self) becoming an individual Self in this world, draws to itself the five senses with the mind as the sixth. They all depend on Nature.

शरीरं यदवाप्नोति यच्चाप्युत्क्रामतीश्वरः। गृहीत्वैतानि संयाति वायुर्गन्धानिवाशयात्
When (this Self) the king of the body, assumes or quits the body, it departs taking them away, as the wind takes away the fragrance.

श्रोत्रं चक्षुः स्पर्शनं च रसनं घ्राणमेव च। अधिष्ठाय मनश्चायं विषयानुपसेवते
Presiding over the ear, the eye, the organs of touch, taste and smell, and the mind. It (the Self) enjoys all objects of senses.

उत्क्रामन्तं स्थितं वापि भुञ्जान् वा गुणान्वितम्। विमूढा नानुपश्यन्ति पश्यन्ति ज्ञानचक्षुषः
Those that are deluded do not see It when It remains in the body, or when It quits it, when It enjoys or when It is joined with qualities. But those see it who have the eye of knowledge.

यतन्तो योगिनश्चैनं पश्यन्त्यात्मन्यवस्थितम्। यतन्तोऽप्यकृतात्मानो नैनं पश्यन्त्यचेतसः
Devotees who are trying to attain to emancipation see It in their own bodies. But those that are senseless, and whose minds are not restrained, do not see It, although they too are trying for emancipation.

यदादित्यगतं तेजो जगद् भासयतेऽखिलम्। यच्चन्द्रमसि यच्चागग्नौ तत् तेजो विद्धि मामकम्
The refulgence in the Sun which illuminates the vast universe, that which is in the Moon, and in the Fire, know it to be mine.

गामाविश्य च भूतानि धारयाम्यहमोजसा। पुष्णामि चौषश्वीः सर्वाः सोमो भूत्वारसात्मकः
Entering into the earth I uphold every thing by My Force, and becoming Savoury Moon, I nourish all plants.

अहं वैश्वानरो भूत्वा प्राणिनां देहमाश्रितः। प्राणापानसमायुक्तः पचाम्यन्नं चतुर्विधम्
Becoming the vital heat in the bodies of creatures, and mixing with the upward and downward breaths, I digest the four kinds of food.

सर्वस्य चाहं हृदि संनिविष्टो मत्तः स्मृतिर्ज्ञानमपोहनं च। वेदैश्च सर्वैरहमेव वेद्यो वेदान्तकृद् वेदविदेव चाहम्
I am in the hearts of all. Memory and knowledge, and the loss of both, are all from Me. I am the objects of knowledge to be known from the Vedas. I am the author of the Vedantas, and again I alone am the object to be known of the Vedas.

द्वाविमौ पुरुषौ लोके क्षरश्चाक्षर एव च। क्षरः सर्वाणि भूतानि कूटस्थोऽक्षर उच्यते
There are two entities in this universe, namely the Perishable and the Imperishable. All creatures are the Perishable, and the unconcerned One is the Imperishable.

उत्तमः पुरुषस्त्वन्यः परमात्मेत्युदाहृतः। यो लोकत्रयमाविश्य बिभर्त्यव्यय ईश्वरः
But there is another, namely the Supreme Being, called Paramatma, who being the everlasting Lord, and pervading the three worlds, sustains them.

यस्तात् क्षरमतीतोऽहमक्षरादपि चोत्तमः। अतोऽस्मि लोके वेदे च प्रथितः पुरुषोत्तमः
As I transcend the Perishable, and as I am higher then even the Imperishable, I am celebrated in the world and sung in the Vedas as Purushottama.

यो मामेवमसम्मूढो जानाति पुरुषोत्तमम्। स सर्वविद् भजति मां सर्वभावेन भारत
He, who without being deluded, knows Me to be this Highest Being, O Bharata, knowing all this, worships Me with all thoughts.

इति गुह्यतमं शास्त्रमिदमुक्तं मयानघ। एतद् बुद्ध्वा बुद्धिमान् स्यात् कृतकृत्यश्च भारत
I have thus, O holy one, declared to you this knowledge, the greatest of all mysteries. Knowing this, O Bharata, one becomes gifted with intelligence, and he has done all that he needs do".

श्रीभगवानुवाच अभयं सत्त्वसंशुद्धिर्ज्ञानयोगव्यवस्थितिः। दानं दमश्च यज्ञश्च स्वाध्यायस्तप आर्जवम्
The great one said Fearlessness, purity of heart, perseverance, Yoga meditation, gifts, self restraint, sacrifice, study of the Vedas, penances, uprightness.

अहिंसां सत्यमक्रोधस्त्यागः शान्तिरपैशुनम्। दया भूतेष्वलोलुप्त्वं मार्दवं ह्रीरचापलम्
Non-doing of injury, truth, freedom from anger, renunciation, tranquility, freedom from fault-finding, compassion for all, absence of covetousness, gentleness, modesty, absence of restlessness.

तेजः क्षमाः धृतिः शौचमद्रोहो नातिमानिता। भवन्ति सम्पदं दैवीमभिजातस्य भारत
Vigor, forgiveness, firmness, cleanliness, absence of quarrel sameness, freedom from vanity, O Bharata, all these belong to him who is god-like.

दम्भो दर्पोऽभिमानश्च क्रोधः पारुष्यमेव च। अज्ञानं चाभिजातस्य पार्थ सम्पदमासुरीम्
Hypocrisy, pride, conceit, wrath, rudeness, and ignorance, O Partha, belong to him who is demoniac.

दैवी सम्पद् विमोक्षाय निबन्धायासुरी मता। मा शुचः सम्पदं दैवीमभिजातोऽसि पाण्डव
Godliness is considered to be the means for emancipation, and demoniacness for bondage of births. You need not grieve, O son of Pandu, for Dushasana you are born to be god-like.

द्वौ भूतस! लोकेऽस्मिन् दैव आसुर एव च। दैवो विस्तरशः प्रोक्त आसुरं पार्थ मे शृणु प्रवृत्तिं च निवृत्तिं च जना न विदुरासुराः। न शौचं नापि चाचारो न सत्यं तेषु विद्यते
There are two kinds of created beings in this world, namely God-like and demoniac. The God-like has been fully described by me. Now hear from me, Partha, something of the demoniac. Persons of demoniac nature know now what is action and what is inaction. Neither purity, nor good conduct, nor truth exists in them.

असत्यमप्रतिष्ठं ते जगदाहुरनीश्वरम्। अपरस्परसम्भूतं किमन्यत् कामहैतुकम्
The demoniac say, the universe is void of truth, of a guiding principle and of a ruler. They say universe has been produced only by the union of one another and by lust.

एतां दृष्टिमवष्टभ्य नष्टात्मानोऽल्पबुद्धयः। प्रभवन्त्युग्रकर्माणः क्षयाय जगतोऽहिताः
Believing and demanding on this, these men of lost self, of little intelligence, and of fearful deeds, these enemies of the world, are born for the destruction of the piety of the universe.

काममाश्रित्य दुष्पुरं दम्भमानमदान्विताः। मोहाद् गृहीत्वासद्ग्राहान् प्रवर्तन्तेऽशुचिव्रताः
Being endued with hypocrisy, conceit and folly, and cherishing insatiable desires, they believe in false things, and perform sinful practices.

चिन्तामपरिमेयां च प्रलयान्तामुपाश्रिताः। कामोपभोगपरमा एतावदिति निश्चिताः
Cherishing boundless thoughts which are limited by death only and considering the enjoyment of their desires as the highest aim of life, they believe that this is all.

आशापाशशतैर्बद्धाः कामक्रोधपरायणाः। ईहन्ते कामभोगार्थमन्यायेनार्थसंचयान्
Bound in hundred nooses of Hope, and addicted to lust and wrath, they eagerly desire to possess unfair hoards of wealth, so that they may gratify their desire.

इदमद्य मया लब्धमिमं प्राप्स्ये मनोरथम्। इदमस्तीदमपि मे भविष्यति पुनर्धनम्
This is obtained today by Me-I shall obtain this to-morrow, I have this wealth, this wealth again will be mine in addition to what I already possess.

असौ मया हतः शत्रुर्हनिष्ये चापरानपि। ईश्वरोऽहमहं भोगी सिद्धोऽहं बलवान्सुखी
This enemy of mine has been killed by me, I shall kill other enemies also, I am the lord, I am the enjoyed, I am successful, I am powerful and happy.

आढ्योऽभिजनवानस्मि कोऽन्योऽस्ति सदृशो मया। अक्ष्ये दास्यामि मोदिष्य इत्यज्ञानविमोहिताः
I am wealthy, I am nobly born, who is there in this world as I am, I shall sacrifice, I shall make gifts, I shall be merry, (thus say the demoniac), deluded by ignorance.

अनेकचित्तविभ्रान्ता मोहजालसमावृताः। प्रसक्ताः कामभोगेषु पतन्ति नरकेऽशुचौ
Tossed about by innumerable thoughts, enveloped by delusion, and attached to the enjoyment of desire, these men sink into the lowliest hell.

आत्मसम्भाविताः स्तब्धा धनमानमदान्विताः। यजयन्ते नामयज्ञैस्ते दम्भेनाविधिपूर्वकम्
These men, being self conceited, stubborn, and full of pride and intoxication of wealth, perform Sacrifices, that are nominal, that rest on hypocrisy, and do not follow the prescribed rules.

अहंकारं बलं दर्प कामं क्रोधं च संश्रिताः। मामात्मपरदेहेषु प्रद्विषन्तोऽभ्यसूयकाः
These men, the servitors, being full of vanity, power, pride, lust and wrath, hate Me in their own bodies as well as in those of others.

तानहं द्विषतः क्रूरान् संसारेषु नराधमान्। क्षिपाम्यजस्रमशुभानासुरीष्वेव योनिषु
These cruel heaters of Me, these sinful, vilest men among men, are hurled continually down by Me into demoniac wombs (to be demoniac in their next births).

आसुरीं योनिमापन्ना मूढा जन्मनि जन्मनि। मामप्राप्यैव कौन्तेय ततो यान्त्यधमा गतिम्
O son of Kunti, these men, taking births into demoniac womb, deluded birth after birth, ge down to the vilest state.

त्रिविधं नरकस्येदं द्वारं नाशनमात्मनः। काम: क्रोधस्तथा लोभस्तस्मादेतत् त्रयं त्यजेत्
Threefold is the way to hell, ever ruinous to self, namely, lust, and avarice. Therefore, one should, above all, renounces these three.

एतैर्विमुक्तः कौन्तेय तमोद्वारैस्त्रिभिर्नरः। आचरत्यात्मनः श्रेयस्ततो याति परां गतिम्
Being freed from these three gates of darkness, O son of Kunti, a man works out his own good. He then reaches the highest goal.

यः शास्त्रविधिमुत्सृज्य वर्तते कामकारतः। न स सिद्धिमवाप्नोति न सुखं न परां गतिम्
He who renounces the ordinance of the Vedas, acts only under the impulse of desire. Such a man can never attain to perfection, happiness, or the highest goal.

तस्माच्छास्त्रं प्रमाण ते कार्याकार्यव्यवस्थितौ। ज्ञात्वा शास्त्रविधानोक्तं कर्म कर्तुमिहार्हसि
Therefore, the Vedas should be your authority in determining what you should do and what you should not do. It is your duty to work in this world, having ascertained what are the ordinances of the Vedas”.

अर्जुन उवाच ये शास्त्रविधिमुत्सृज्य यजन्ते श्रद्धयाऽन्विताः। तेषां निष्ठा तु का कृष्ण सत्त्वमाहो रजस्तमः
Arjuna said What is the state, Krishna, of those that neglects the ordinance of the scriptures and perform sacrifices with faith? Is it one of Sattva, Raja or Tama?

श्रीभगवानुवाच त्रिविधा भवति श्रद्धा देहिनां सा स्वभावजा। सात्त्विकी राजसी चैव तामसी चेतितां शृणु
The great one said The faith of man is of three kinds. They are born according to his individual nature. They are also of Sattva, Raja, and Tama. Hear what they are.

सत्त्वानुरूपा सर्वस्य श्रद्धा भवति भारत। श्रद्धामयोऽयं पुरुषो यो यच्छ्रद्धः स एव सः
The faith of man, O Bharata is according to his own nature. A man may be full of faith, and as his faith is so he will be.

यजन्ते सात्त्विका देवान् यक्षरक्षांसि राजसाः। प्रेतान् भूतगणांश्चान्ये यजन्ते तामसा जनाः
Those who are of the Sattva quality worship the celestial, those of Raja worship Yakshas and Rakshasas, and those of Tama do the same to departed spirits and ghosts.

अशास्त्रविहितं घोरं तप्यन्ते ये तपो जनाः। दम्भाहंकारसंयुक्तः कामरागबलान्विताः
Those who practice severe penances not ordained by the Vedas, who are full of hypocrisy and pride, desire, attachment and violence.

कर्शयन्तः शरीरस्थं भूतग्राममचेतसः। मां चैवान्तः शरीरस्थं तान् विद्ध्यासुरनिश्चयान्
Who has no discernment, but who torture their physical organs, thereby torturing Me who seat within the body, should be known to be of demoniac nature.

आहारस्त्वपि सर्वस्य त्रिविधो भवति प्रियः। यज्ञस्तपस्तथा दानं तेषां भेदमिमं शृणु।
Food which is dear to all is also of three kinds. Sacrifice, penance, and gifts are also of three kinds. Hear from Me their distinction, one

आयुः सत्त्ववलारोग्यसुखप्रीतिविवर्धनाः। रस्याः स्निग्धाः स्थिरा हृद्या आहाराः सात्त्विकप्रियाः।।
The food that increase longevity, energy, strength, health, and well-being and joy, and which is savoury, indigenous, and agreeable, is liked by men of Sattva nature.

कट्वाललवणात्युष्णतीक्ष्णरूक्षविदाहिनः। आहारा राजसस्येष्टा दुःखशोकामयप्रदाः
The food which is bitter, sour, salted, overhot, pungent, dry and burning, and which produces pain, grief and disease, is desired by a man of Raja temperament.

यातयामं गतरसं पूति पर्युषितं च यत्। उच्छिष्टमपि चामेध्यं भोजनं तामसप्रियम्
The food which is cold, not savory, stinky, corrupt, filthy and a refuse, is liked by men of Tama.

अफलाकाक्षिभिर्यज्ञो विधिदृष्टो य इज्यते। यष्टव्यमेवेति मन: समाधाय स सात्त्विकः
Sattva Sacrifice is which being prescribed by the Shastras, is performed by a man who desires no fruit from it, and who performs it by believing it to be only a duty.

अभिसंधाय तु फलं दम्भार्थमपि चैव यत्। इज्यते भरतश्रेष्ठ तं यज्ञं विद्धि राजसम्
But O chief son of Bharata, Raja Sacrifice is that which is performed in expectation of receiving fruits from it and for ostentatious show.

विधिहीनमसृष्टान्नं मन्त्रहीनमदक्षिणम्। श्रद्धाविरहितं यज्ञं तामसं परिचक्षते
And Tama sacrifice is that which is performed against the ordinances of the Shastras in which food is not distributed, Mantras are not recited, fees are not paid to the assisting priests and which is void of faith.

देवदविजगुरुप्राज्ञपूजनं शौचमार्जवम्। ब्रह्मचर्यमहिंसा च शारीरं तप उच्यते
Reverence to Celestial, regenerate ones, preceptors, and learned men, and purity, uprightness, the practices of a Brahmachary, and abstention from injury, constitute the penance of body.

अनुद्वेगकरं वाक्यं सत्यं प्रियहितं च यत्। स्वाध्यायाभ्यसनं चैव वारड्मयं तप उच्यते
The words that does not disturb any body and which is agreeable, true and beneficial, and the diligent study of the Vedas, is the penance of speech.

मनःप्रसादः सौम्यत्वं मौनमात्मविनिग्रहः। भावसंशुद्धिरित्येतत् तपो मानसमुच्यते
Serenity of mind, gentleness, taciturnity, self restraint, and purity of disposition, constitute the penance of mind.

श्रद्धया परया तप्तं तपस्तत् त्रिविधं नरैः। अफलार्काक्षिभिर्युक्तैः सात्त्विकं परिचक्षते
Now Sattva Penance is that in which this three-fold penance is performed with perfect faith, with devotion and without the desire for fruit.

सत्कारमानपूजार्थं तपो दम्भेन चैव यत्। क्रियते तदिह प्रोक्तं राजसं चलमध्रुवम्
Raja Penance is that which is performed with hypocrisy for gaining respect honour, and revenue, and which is unstable and transient.

मूढग्राहेणात्मनो यत् पीडया क्रियते तपः। परस्योत्सादनार्थं वा तत् तामसमुदाहृतम्
Tama Penance is that which is performed under a deluded belief, and with torture of one's self, and for the destruction of another,

दातव्यमिति यद् दानं दीयतेऽनुपकारिणे। देशे काले च पात्रे च तद् दानं सात्त्विकं स्मृतम्
Sattva gift is that which is given because it ought to be given; it is given to one who cannot return it in any way; it is given in a proper place, at a proper time, and to a proper person.

यत्तु प्रत्युपकारार्थं फलमुद्दिश्य वा पुनः। दीयते च परिक्लिष्टं तद् दानं राजसं स्मृतम्
Raja gift is that which is given reluctantly, for return of some sort of service or benefit, and with an eye to fruit.

अदेशकाले यद् दानमपात्रेभ्यश्च दीयते। श्रऊसत्कृतमवज्ञातं तत् तामसमुदाहृतम्
Tama gift is that which is given without respect and with contempt to an unworthy object in an improper place and at an improper time.

ॐ तत्सदिति निर्देशो ब्रह्मणस्त्रिविधः स्मृतः। ब्राह्मणास्तेन वेदाश्च यज्ञाश्च विहिताः पुरा
Om, Tat, Sat, these are the threefold designation of Brahma. The Brahmanas, the Vedas and the Yajnas are all ordained in ancient time by Brahma.

तस्मादोमित्युदाहृत्य यज्ञदानतपः क्रियाः। प्रवर्तन्ते विधानोक्ताः सततं ब्रह्मवादिनाम्
Therefore, uttering the syllable, Om, all utterers of Brahma begin their sacrifices, fits and penances, as ordained in the Shastras.

तदित्यनभिसंधाय फलं यज्ञतप:क्रियाः। दानक्रियाश्च विविधा क्रियन्ते मोक्षकाक्षिभिः
Uttering TAT, the various sacrifices, gifts and penances are performed by those who desire emancipation, and who do not without expectation of fruit.

सद्भावे साधुभावे च सदित्येतत् प्रयुज्यते। प्रशस्ते कर्मणि तथा सच्छब्दः पार्थ युज्यते
Sat denotes existence and goodness, O Partha; it is used in any suspicious acts.

यज्ञे तपसि दाने च स्थितिः सदिति चोच्यते। कर्म चैव तदर्थीयं सदित्येवाभिधीयते
Constancy in sacrifices, penances and gifts is also called SAT. For its sake an act is also called SAT.

अश्रद्धया हुतं दत्तं तपस्तप्तं कृतं च यत्। असदित्युच्यते पार्थ न च तत् प्रेत्य नो इह
Whatever oblation is offered in a sacrifice, whatever is given away, whatever penance is performed, and whatever is done, if done without faith, is, O Partha the opposite of SAT. It (opposite of SAT) will do no good to the life in this world or hereafter in the next.

अर्जुन उवाच संन्यासस्य महाबाहो तत्त्वमिच्छामि वेदितुम्। त्यागस्य च हृषीकेश पृथक् केशिनिषूदन
Arjuna said O mighty-armed, I desire to know the true nature of Sanyasa (Renunciation) and Tyaga (Abandonment). O slayer of Keshi, I want to know them distinctly.

श्रीभगवानुवाच काम्यानां कर्मणां न्यासं संन्यासं कवयो विदुः। सर्वकर्मफलत्यागं प्राहुस्त्यागं विचक्षणाः
The great one said Rejection of works with some desire is known by the learned as Sanyasa. But the abandonment of the desire for the fruit of all works, is called Tyaga, by the discerning man.

त्याज्यं दोषवदित्येके कर्म प्राहुर्मनीषिणः। यज्ञदानतपःकर्म न त्याज्यमिति चापरे
Some wise men say that work itself should be abandoned considering it to be evil; others say that the works of sacrifice, gifts and penance should not be renounced.

मे तत्र त्यागे भरतसत्तम। त्यागो हि पुरुषव्याघ्र त्रिविधः सम्प्रकीर्तितः
0 best of Bharata's son, listen to my opinion about Tyaga, for powerful of men, Tyaga is of three kinds.

यज्ञदानतपःकर्म न त्याज्यं कार्यमेव तत्। यज्ञो दान तपश्चैव पावनानि मनीषिणाम्
The works of sacrifice, gifts and penance should not be renounced. They should indeed be performed, for, sacrifices, gifts and penances are the means for the purification of the wise.

एतान्यपि तु कर्माणि सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा फलानि च। कर्तव्यानीति में पार्थ निश्चितं मतमुत्तमम् निश्चयं शृणु
But these works should be performed without attachment and without the desire for fruits. Partha, this is my decided opinion.

नियतस्य तु संन्यासः कर्मणो नोपपद्यते। मोहात् तस्य परित्यागस्तामसः परिकीर्तितः
The Renunciation of work is not proper. It is the result of delusion and arises from Tama.

दुःखमित्येव यत् कर्म कायक्लेशभयात् त्यजेत्। स कृत्वा राजसं त्यागं नैव त्यागफलं लभेत्
When work is abandoned from bodily fear and froin the consideration of pain, such abandonment arises from Raja, and one who makes such abandonment never obtains the fruit of Tyaga.

कार्यमित्येव यत् कर्म नियतं क्रियतेऽर्जुन। सङ्गत्यक्त्वा फलं चैव स त्यागः सात्त्विको मतः
The abandonment of attachment and the fruit of actions which are performed because they are prescribed in the Shastras. O Arjuna, is considered to be of the quality of Sativa.

न द्वेष्ट्यकुशलं कर्म कुशले नानुषज्जते। त्यागी सत्त्वसमाविष्टो मेधावी छिन्नसंशयः
He, who has such Tyaga, being possessed of intelligence and with doubts dispelled, has no aversion for an unpleasant action, and has no attachment for pleasant ones.

न हि देहभृता शक्यं त्यक्तुं कर्माण्यशेषतः। यस्तु कर्मफलत्यागी स त्यागीत्यभिधीयते
Actions cannot be absolutely a abandoned by man; therefore he, who abandons the fruit of actions, is a true Tyagi.

अनिष्टमिष्टं मिश्रं च त्रिविधं कर्मणः फलम्। भवत्यत्यागिनां प्रेत्य न तु संन्यासिनां क्वचित्
Those, that do not abandon the desire for the fruit of actions, have after death threefold fruits, good, bad and indifferent.

पञ्चैतानि महाबाहो कारणानि निबोध मे। सांख्ये कृतान्ते प्रोक्तानि सिद्धये सर्वकर्मणाम्
Listen to me, O mighty armed (I shall declare to you) the five causes for the completion of actions, as told in the Sankhya which treats with the annihilation of actions.

अधिष्ठान तथा कर्ता करणं च पृथग्विधम्। विविधाश्च पृथक्चेष्टा दैवं चैवात्र पञ्चमम्
Substratum (body), Agency (mind). Organs (physical), Efforts (vital breaths) and Duties (senses), these are the five causes.

शरीरवाड्मनोभिर्यत् कर्म प्रारभते नरः। न्याय्यं वा विपरीतं वा पञ्चैते तस्य हेतवः
With body, speech or mind, whatever work, good or bad, a man performs these five are their causes.

तत्रैवं सति कर्तारमात्मानं केवलं तु यः। पश्यत्यकृतबुद्धित्यान्न स पश्यति दुर्मतिः
Such being the case, he who, owing to his uncultivated understanding and dull mind, sees his own self as the sole agency of all actions, sees nothing.

यस्य नाहंकृतो भावो बुद्धिर्यस्य न लिप्यते। हत्वापि स इमाँल्लोकान्न हन्ति न निबध्यते
He who has no egoism, and whose mind is not sullied, does not kill, or fettered by action, if he kills all these people.

ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं परिज्ञाता त्रिविधा कर्मचोदना। करणं कर्म कर्तेति त्रिविधः कर्मसंग्रहः
Knowledge, the Object of knowledge and the Knower, from the threefold impulse of action.. Instrument. Action and Agent from the threefold complements of action.

ज्ञानं कर्म च कर्ता च त्रिधैव गुणभेदतः। प्रोच्यते गुणसंख्याने यथावच्छृणु तान्यपि
Knowledge, Action and Agent have threefold enumeration, according to the difference of qualities. Listen to them now.

सर्वभूतेषु येनैकं भावमव्ययमीक्षते। अविभक्तं विभक्तेषु तज्ज्ञानं विद्धि सात्त्विकम्
Sattva Knowledge is that by which One Eternal Essence undivided in the divided is seen in all things.

पृथक्त्वेन तु यज्ज्ञानं नानाभावान् पृथग्विधान्। वेत्ति सर्वेषु भूतेषु तज्ज्ञानं विद्धि राजसम्
Raja Knowledge is that which sees various Essences of different things, on account of their separateness.

यत्तु कृत्स्नवदेकस्मिन् कार्ये सक्तमहैतुकम्। अतत्त्वार्थवदल्पं च तत् तामसमुदाहृतम
Tama Knowledge is that which sees each single object as if it were the whole which is without reason and without truth, and which is mean and low.

नियतं सङ्गरहितमरागद्वेषतः कृतम्। अफलप्रेप्सुना कर्म यत्तत् सात्त्विकमुच्यते
Sattva Action is that which is prescribed in the Shastras, which is performed without attachment, desire or aversion, and without the desire for any fruit by the performer.

यत्तु कामेप्सुना कर्म साहंकारेण वा पुनः। क्रियते बहुलायासं तद् राजसमुदाहृतम्
Raja Action is that which is attended with great trouble and which is performed by one who desires for the fruit of action and who is filled with egoism.

अनुबन्धं क्षयं हिंसामनवेक्ष्य च पौरुषम्। मोहादारभ्यते कर्म यत्तत् तामसमुच्यते
Tama Action is that which is performed from delusion, without regard to consequences and with one's own loss and injury as well as of others.

मुक्तसङ्गोऽनहंवादी धृत्युत्साहसमन्वितः। सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योर्निर्विकारः कर्ता सात्त्विक उच्यते
Sattva Agent is he who is free from attachment, and egoism, who is full of constancy and energy and who is unmoved both in success and failure.

रागी कर्मफलप्रेप्सुर्लुब्धो हिंसात्मकोऽशुचिः। हर्षशोकान्वितः कर्ता राजसः परिकीर्तितः
Raja Agent is he who is full of affections, who desires for the fruit of actions, who is covetous, cruel and impure, and feels both joy and sorrow.

अयुक्तः प्राकृतः स्तब्धः शठो नैकृतिकोऽलसः। विषादी दीर्घसूत्री च कर्ता तामस उच्यते
Tama Agent is he who is void of application, who is without discernment, who is obstinate, deceitful malicious, idle, desponding, and procrastinating.

बुद्धेर्थेदं धृतेश्चैव गुणतस्त्रिविधं शृणु। प्रोच्यमानमशेषेण पृथक्त्वेन धनंजयः
Listen to three fold division of intellect and constancy. O Dhananjaya, I shall exhaustively and distinctly speak to you on this matter.

प्रवृत्तिं च निवृत्तिं च कार्याकार्ये भयाभये। बन्धं मोक्षं च या वेत्ति बुद्धिः सा पार्थ सात्त्विकी
Sattva Intellect, O Partha, is that which knows action and inaction, what ought to be done and what ought not to be done, and which knows fear and fearfulness, bondage and deliverance.

यया धर्ममधर्मं च कार्य चाकार्यमेव च। अयथावत् प्रजानाति बुद्धिः सा पार्थ राजसी
Raja Intellect, O Partha, is that by which one imperfectly discerns right and wrong, and what ought to be done and what ought not to be done.

अधर्मं धर्ममिति या मन्यते तमसाऽवृता। सर्वार्थान् विपरीतांश्च बुद्धिः सा पार्थ तामसी
Tama Intellect, O Partha, is that by which, being one covered by ignorance, considers wrong to be right, and sees all things in a reverse state.

धृत्या यया धारयते मनःप्राणेन्द्रियक्रियाः। योगेनाव्यभिचारिण्या धृतिः सा पार्थ सात्त्विकी
Sattva constancy, O Partha, is that by which through devotion one controls the function of the mind, the life-breaths and the senses.

यया तु धर्मकामार्थान् धृत्या धारयतेऽर्जुन। प्रसङ्गेन फलाकाक्षी धृतिः सा पार्थ राजसी
Raja constancy, O Partha, is that by which through attachment one holds to religion, and profit, washing for fruit.

यया स्वप्नं भयं शोकं विषादं मदमेव च। न विमुञ्चति दुर्मेधा धृतिः सा पार्थ तामसी
Tama Constancy, O Partha, is that thought which undiscerning person does not abandons sleep, fear, sorrow, dependency and folly.

सुखं त्विदानी त्रिविधं शृणु मे भरतर्षभ। अभ्यासाद् रमते यत्र दुःखान्तं च निगच्छति यत्तदने विषमिव परिणामेऽमृतोपमम्। तत्सुखं सात्त्विकं प्रोक्तमात्मबुद्धिप्रसादजम्
Now hear from Me, O best of Bharata race, what are the three kinds of happiness. Sattva Happiness is that in which one finds pleasure from repetition of enjoyment, which brings an end to all pain, which is like poison in the beginning, but ambrosia afterwards, which is born out of serenity, and is produced by knowledge.

विषयेन्द्रियसंयोगाद् यत्तदचेऽमृतोपमम्। परिणामे विषमिव तत् सुखं राजसं स्मृतम्
Raja Happiness is that which arise from the contact of the senses with their objects and which ambrosia in the beginning and poison next.

यदग्रे चानुबन्धे च सुखं मोहनमात्मनः। निद्रालस्यप्रमादोत्थं तत्तामसमुदाहृतम्
Tama Happiness is that which deludes the self in the beginning and in its consequences, and which arises from sleep, condolence and foolishness.

न तदस्ति पृथिव्यां वा दिवि देवेषु वा पुनः। सत्त्व प्रकृतिजैर्मुक्तं यदेभिः स्यात् त्रिभिर्गुणैः
There is none, either among the beings on earth or among be celestial in heaven, which is free from these three qualities born of Nature.

ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियविशां शूद्राणां च परंतप। कर्माणि प्रविभक्तानि स्वभावप्रभवैर्गुणैः
O chastiser of foes, the duties of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, and Shudras are each distinguished by these three qualities, born of nature.

शमो दमस्तपः शौचं क्षान्तिरार्जवमेव च। ज्ञानं विज्ञानमास्तिक्यं ब्रह्मकर्म स्वभावजम्
Tranquility, self restraint, penances purity, forgiveness, rectitude, knowledge, experience and faith, these are the distinctive features of a Brahmana.

शौर्यं तेजो धृतिर्दाक्ष्यं युद्धे चाप्यपलायनम्। दानमीश्वरभावश्च क्षात्रं कर्म स्वभावजम्
Bravery, energy, firmness, skill, firmness in battle, liberality, majesty, these are distinctive features of a Kshatriya.

कृषिगौरक्ष्यवाणिज्यं वैश्यकर्म स्वभावजम्। परिचर्यात्मकं कर्म शूद्रस्यापि स्वभावजम्
Agriculture, tending of cattle and trade, these are the duties of a Vaishya. The natural duty of a Shudra is service.

स्वे स्वे कर्मण्यभिरतः संसिद्धि लभते नरः। स्वकर्मनिरतः सिद्धि यथा विन्दति तच्छृणु।
Every man, if he engages in his own natural duty, attains to perfection. Hear, how man attains to perfection by performing him own natural duties,

यतः प्रवृत्तिर्भूतानां येन सर्वमिदं ततम्। स्वकर्मणा तमभ्यर्च्य सिद्धि विन्दति मानवः
Worshipping Him, from whom are the life of beings, and by whom all the universe is pervaded, by the performance of his own duty man is sure to attain to perfection.

श्रेयान् स्वधर्मो विगुणः परधर्मात् स्वनुष्ठितात्। स्वभावनियतं कर्म कुर्वन् नाप्नोति किल्बिषम्
Better is one's own duty, though performed imperfectly, than another's duty wellperformed. Man incurs no sin by performing his duty prescribed by Nature.

सहजं कर्म कौन्तेय सदोषमपि न त्यजेत्। सर्वारम्भा हि दोषेण धूमेनाग्निरिवावृताः
Man must not, O son of Kunti abandon his natural duties, however bad they might be-for all actions are enveloped by error as fire by smoke.

असक्तबुद्धिः सर्वत्र जितात्मा विगतस्पृहः । नैष्कर्म्यसिद्धि परमां संन्यासेनाधिगच्छति
He whose mind is unattached to any thing, who has subdued his self, and whose desire is gone, through Sanyasa, obtains the supreme perfection of freedom from action.

सिद्धि प्राप्तो यथा ब्रह्म तथाऽऽप्नोति निबोध मे। समासेनैव कौन्तेय निष्ठा ज्ञानस्य या परा
Learn in brief, O son of Kunti, how a man, obtaining perfection, attains to Brahma, the Supreme End of Knowledge.

बुद्ध्या विशुद्धया युक्तो धृत्याऽऽत्मानं नियम्य च। शब्दादीन् विषयांस्त्यक्त्वा रागद्वेषौव्युदस्य च
Having a pure mind, restraining his self by constancy, renouncing all objects of sense, and casting off affection and aversion.

विविक्तसेवी लध्वाशी यतवाक्कायमानसः। ध्यानयोगपरो नित्यं वैराग्यं समुपाश्रितः
He who resides in a lonely place, cats little, restrains his speech, body and mind, who is ever intent on meditation and abstraction, who is unconcerned.

अहंकार बलं दर्प कामं क्रोधं परिग्रहम्। विमुच्य निर्ममः शान्तो ब्रह्मभूयाय कल्पते
Who is free from egoism, violence, pride, lust, wrath, surroundings, who is devoid of selfishness and is tranquil, become fit for assimilation with Brahma.

ब्रह्मभूतः प्रसन्नात्मा न शोचति न काङ्क्षति। समः सर्वेषु भूतेषु मद्भक्ति लभते पराम्
Becoming one with Brahma, and obtaining tranquility in spirit, man grieves not and desires not. Seeing all beings alike, he obtains the highest devotion to Me.

भक्त्या मामभिजानाति यावान् यश्चास्मि तत्त्वतः। ततो मां तत्त्वतो ज्ञात्वा विशते तदनन्तरम्
By devotion he truly knows Me, truly what I am and who I am. Then knowing Me truly, he forthwith enters into Me.

सर्वकर्माण्यपि सदा कुर्वाणो मद्यपाश्रयः। मत्प्रसादादवाप्नोति शाश्वतं पदमव्ययम्
Even performing all actions at all times, such a man, having his refuge in Me, obtains through My favour that state which is eternal and imperishable.

चेतसा सर्वकर्माणि मयि संन्यस्य मत्परः। बुद्धियोगमुपाश्रित्य मच्चित्तः सततं भव
Mentally dedicating all actions to Me, restoring to mental abstraction, being devoted to Me, fix your thoughts constantly on Me.

मच्चित्तः सर्वदुर्गाणि मत्प्रसादात् तरिष्यसि। अथ चेत् त्वमहंकारान्न श्रोष्यसि विनक्ष्यसि
Fixing your thoughts on Me, you will surmount all difficulties through My favour. But if from self-conceit you do not listen to Me, you will surely perish.

यदहंकारमाश्रित्य न योत्स्य इति मन्यसे। मिथ्यैष व्यवसायस्ते प्रकृतिस्त्वां नियोक्ष्यति
If out of self-conceit you think “I will not fight,” your this resolution will be in vain, for surely will Nature rule you.

स्वभावजेन कौन्तेय निबद्धः स्वेन कर्मणा। कर्तुनेच्छसि यन्मोहात् करिष्यस्यवशोऽपि तत्
Bound by your own Duty, ordained by Nature, you will involuntarily do not, which, out of delusion, you do not wish to do.

ईश्वरः सर्वभूतानां हृद्देशेऽर्जुन तिष्ठति। भ्रामयन् सर्वभूतानि यन्त्रारूढानि मायया
The Lord, O Arjuna, as if mounted on a machine, sits in the heart of all beings, turning them as He pleases by His illusive powers.

तमेव शरणं गच्छ सर्वभावेन भारत। तत्प्रसादात् परां शान्ति स्थान प्राप्स्यसि शाश्वतम्
O Bharata, seek shelter under Him in every way. By his favour, you will get Supreme Peace and the Eternal Seat.

इति ते ज्ञानमाख्यातं गुह्याद् गुह्यतरं मया। विमृश्यैतदशेषेण यथेच्छसि तथा कुरु
I have thus declared to you the knowledge which is more mysterious than any other mystery. Reflect on it fully, and then act as you like.

सर्वगुह्यतमं भूयः शृणु मे परमं वचः। इष्टोऽसि मे दृढमिति ततो वक्ष्यामि ते हितम्
Once more hcar My supernatural words, the most mysterious mystery of all. You are very dear to Me; therefore, I tell you what is good for you.

मन्मना भव मद्भक्तो मद्याजी मां नमस्कुरु। मामेवैष्यसि सत्यं ते प्रतिजाने प्रियोऽसि मे
Fix your heart on Me, become My devotee, sacrifice to Me, bow down to Me, you will then come to Me. I tell you the truth, for you are very dear to Me.

सर्वधर्मान् परित्यज्य मामेकं शरणं व्रजा अहं त्वा सर्वपापेभ्यो मोक्षयिष्यामि मा शुचः
Forsaking all religious duties, come to Me, come to Me as your sole refuge. I shall deliver yo:l from all your sins. Do not grieve.

इदं ते नातपस्काय नाभक्ताय कदाचन। न चाशुश्रूषवे वाच्यं न च मां योऽभ्यसूयति
This knowledge that I have told you must not be declared by you to one who does not practice penances, who is not a devotee, who never waits on a preceptor, and who always culminates Mc.

य इमं परमं गुह्यं मद्भक्तेष्वभिधास्यति। भक्तिं मयि परां मामेवैष्यत्यसंशयः
He, who will inculcate this supreme knowledge to those who are devoted to Me, offering Me his highest devotion, being freed from all doubts, will come to Me.

न च तस्मान्मनुष्येषु कश्चिन्मे प्रियकृत्तमः। भविता न च मे तस्मादन्यः प्रियतरो भुवि
Amongst men none can be dearer to Me than such a man. None on earth can do Me greater service also than he.

अध्येष्यते च य इमं धर्म्यं संवादमावयोः। ज्ञानयज्ञेन तेनाहमिष्टः स्यामिति मे मतिः
And he, who will study this holy conversation between us, will offer to Me the sacrifice of knowledge. This is my opinion.

श्रद्धावाननसूयश्च शृणुयादपि यो नरः। सोऽपि मुक्तः शुभाँल्लोकान् प्राप्नुयात् पुण्यकर्मणाम्।।
Even he, who with faith and without evil, will hear it, being freed from (the bond of births), will obtain the blessed seat of those that perform pious acts.

कच्चिदेतच्छ्रुतं पार्थ त्वयैकाग्रेण चेतसा। कच्चिदज्ञानसम्मोहः प्रनष्टस्ते धनंजय
Have you heard, O Partha, this knowledge with mind undirected to any other object? Has, O Dhananjaya, your delusion, caused by ignorance, been destroyed?

अर्जुन उवाच नष्टो मोहः स्मृतिर्लब्धा त्वत्प्रसादान्मयाऽच्युत। स्थितोऽस्मि गतसंदेहः करिष्ये वचनं तव
Arjuna said O undecaying One, through your favour my delusion is gone, I now know what I am. I am now firm. My doubts have been dispelled. I will obey you. I will do your bidding.

संजय उवाच इत्यहं वासुदेवस्य पार्थस्य च महात्मनः। संवादमिममश्रौषमद्भुतं रोमहर्षणम्
Sanjay said O king, I heard this wonderful and hairstirring words of Vasudeva and Partha.

व्यासप्रसादाच्छ्रुतवानेतद् गुह्यमहं परम्। योगयोगेश्वरात् कृष्णात् साक्षात् कथयतः स्वयम्
Through the favour of Vyasa, I myself heard this mysterious, great and best words from the very lips of the Lord of Yoga, Srikrishna.

राजन् संस्मृत्य संस्मृत्य संवादमिममद्भुतम्। केशवार्जुनयोः पुण्यं हृष्यामि च मुहुर्मुहुः
O king, I am feeling more and more pleasure as much as I am remembering the holy and wonderful words between Srikrishna and Arjuna.

तच्च संस्मृत्य संस्मृत्य रूपमत्यद्भुतं हरेः। विस्मयो मे महान् राजन् हृष्यामि च पुनः पुनः
O king, I am feeling more and more pleasure as much as I am remembering the wonderful manifestation of Srikrishna.

यत्र योगेश्वरः कृष्णो यत्र पार्थो धनुर्धरः। तत्र श्रीविजयो भूतिर्बुवा नीतिर्मतिर्मम
Wherever exist the Lord of Yoga Srikrishna and the great bowman Arjuna, there certainly do wealth, victory and glory exist.